Rikke Alright, get that crown off that draugr!

[The crown's reclaimed.]

Rikke Take that crown back to Solitude, soldier. We'll stay here and see if we
       can find anything ele that could be of use.

[The item is handed back to Tullius at Castle Dour.]

Dragonborn Here's the Jagged Crown. Legate Rikke sent me to deliver it to you.

Tullius Excellent work, soldier. I have to admit, I had my doubts it even
         existed. Did you run into any trouble?

         Nothing I couldn't handle.
         
          That's what I like to hear. I'll get the full report from Legate
          Rikke.

         We lost a lot of good men. I hope it was worth it.
         
          That's not for you to decide. Soldier¹. I wouldn't have sent you in
          the first place if it wasn't going to be worth it.

         The Stormcloaks were there ahead of us.
         
          Yes. Well, I didn't respond as quickly to the Legate's suggestion as
          perhaps I should have. But at least we ended up with the damn crown.

         Now then... I need someone I can trust to deliver a message of great
         import to Jarl Balgruuf of Whiterun. We have it on good authority that
         Ulfric has raised enough men to attack the city of Whiterun. The Jarl,
         however, refuses the Legion's support. This missive should convince
         him. Be aware soldier, these documents contain sensitive intelligence
         for the Jarl's eyes only.

|

|

[The player travels to Dragonsreach, the large hilltop castle overlooking the
 city of Whiterun. The Jarl, as usual, is in the throne room.]

Dragonborn I have an important message from General Tullius.

Balgruuf No doubt requesting to garrison his men in my castle. How many times
          must I deny him? Well? Out with it.

Dragonborn Ulfric plans to attack Whiterun. The General wants to lend Legion
            troops.

Balgruuf • Until that dragon's dealt with, I don't care what Tullius wants.
            For now, give the papers to my steward.

          • I see... Give the papers to my steward.

Dragonborn I was given strict instructions. For the Jarl's eyes only.

Balgruuf Don't be daft. Proventus is my eyes. Just give me the letter. I
          presume once I have it, I can do as I please with it? Good.

          • Now, I believe you have some business to conclude with my court
            wizard?

          • Hmm...these are interesting reports...

[Once the nearby dragon problem is dealt with, the Jarl will look Tullius' note
 over with a bit more interest.]

Balgruuf Proventus, what do you make of all this? If Ulfric were to attack
          Whiterun...

Proventus As in all things, my lord, caution...I urge us to wait and see.

Irileth Prey awaits.

Balgruuf I am of a mind with Irileth. It's time to act.

Proventus You plan to march on Windhelm?

Balgruuf I'm not a fool, Proventus. I mean it's time to challenge Ulfric to
          face me as a man, or to declare his intentions.

Proventus He'll do no such thing!

Irileth He was rather straight forward¹ with Torygg.

Proventus Torygg? He simply walked up to the boy and murdered him!

Irileth That boy was High King of Skyrim.

Balgruuf I'm not the High King, but neither am I a boy. If Ulfric wants to
          challenge my rule in the old way, let him. Though I suspect he'll
          prefer to send his Stormcloaks to do it for him.

Irileth True. He's already proven his personal strength. Now he seeks to prove
         his army's.

Proventus Then might I urge you to consider General Tullius's request? I mean,
           if you are bent on offending Jarl Ulfric...

Irileth Ulfric is the one who has offended. But, Proventus has a point. Ulfric
         has made it clear. In his mind, to refuse his claim is to side with
         the Empire.

Proventus And what harm is there in letting a few Legionnaires die in place
           of your own men?

Balgruuf It seems cowardly.

Irileth Was it cowardly then to accept the White-Gold Concordat?

Balgruuf This again?! That was different. Was I given a chance to object to
          the terms of the treaty? No. The Jarls weren't asked. We were told.
          And we had to like it.

Proventus The chests of gold didn't hurt.

Balgruuf Dammit! This isn't about gold!

Irileth It's time to decide.

Proventus Lord, wait. Let us see if Ulfric is serious.

Balgruuf Oh, he's serious. But so am I.

Irileth Finally.

Balgruuf • You there. I have a message for you to deliver to our friend, the
            esteemed Jarl of Windhelm. Deliver this axe to Ulfric Stormcloak.

          • I've made up my mind, even if my advisors are still squabbling. I'm
            sending you to Windhelm. Deliver this axe to Ulfric Stormcloak.

          An axe?
          
           How long have you been in Skyrim? Yes. Give the man my axe. If he
           returns it to you it means we have business to settle. If he keeps
           it, then we are at peace.

          And you think Ulfric will let me just walk in there, no trouble?
          
           True, he's a dangerous and blood thirsty¹ man, but he's also a Nord
           that honors our traditions. Keep your wits about you and you won't
           be harmed. And then get back here. Because if Ulfric isn't bluffing,
           I'll need every able body to defend Whiterun.

          Should I say anything to him?
          
           Men who understand one another need not waste words. There are but
           a few simple truths behind one warrior giving another his axe.
           Ulfric will know my meaning.

          Understood.
          
           Good. Good...

[The player accepts.]

Balgruuf Proventus. Bring me my pen. And the good parchment.

Proventus Are we writing a letter, my lord?

Balgruuf Yes, to General Tullius. I need to make a few things clear before I
          accept these Legionnaires of his.

[One goes to Windhelm's Palace of the Kings, the seat of Ulfric's power.]

Ulfric Yes? Make it quick, I'm a busy man.

Dragonborn i've brought a message from the Jarl of Whiterun.

Ulfric Is that so? I've been wondering when he'd come around. Oh. What's
        this? Ahhh... You're quite brave to carry such a message. It's a pity
        you've chosen the wrong side... You can return this axe to the man who
        sent it. And tell him he should prepare to entertain...visitors. I
        expect a great deal of excitement in the city of Whiterun in the near
        future...

        You've killed the High King. Why make war on your own people?
        
         I have shown the people that when our Jarls drink the Empire's milk,
         it makes us weak. I must now show them the path that will lead us back
         to our strength. There is no progress without sacrifice. No wheat
         without threshing the chaff. The Empire and the Jarls who back them
         must be swept away. The people demand it. I demand it.

        You will be stopped.
        
         Oh? True, I may meet my end in a dark alley with a dagger in my back.
         But the people have seen the truth, and they will not back down.

        We'll be seeing you soon.
        
         Sooner than you think.

[The message delivered, it's time to report to Balgruuf. Him, Irileth and the
 Imperial Legate are pouring over strategy as a guard arrives.]

Imperial Guard Sir! I...I have...

Legate Quentin Cipius Take a moment to breathe, soldier.

Imperial Soldier But...sir...

Cipius Breathe!

Balgruuf The outer walls are strong. If we can hold them there...

Cipius They have catapults.

Balgruuf Damnit. Where did they get catapults? The city walls are already
          falling apart as it is.

Cipius My scouts tell me they're loading them with fire.

Balgruuf So, he wants to take my city, walls intact.

Cipius The men will be fighting in flames. 

Balgruuf My men are fearless. It's the Imperial milk drinkers I'm worried
          about.

Cipius If you prefer I took my men and left...

Balgruuf No. Of course not. Just -- don't let me down¹ Cipius. We'll need to
          set up water brigades to combat the flames.

Cipius Already taken care of.

Balgruuf You Imperials are efficient, I'll give you that. How long until they
          arrive?

Imperial Soldier Sir.

Cipius Not long. They're hiding in the country side¹.

Balgruuf Damnit. What's he waiting for?

Imperial Soldier Sir!

Cipius What?!

Imperial Soldier Sir, they're on the move. They'll be at the gates at any
                  moment!

Cipius Why didn't you say so immediately?!

Imperial Soldier Sir, I tried.

Balgruuf This is it! Time to see what these Stormcloaks are made of.

Cipius The men are already gathering at the gates. Move it¹ soldier. Spread
        the word. Go. Go. Go.

Balgruuf Oblivion take them. Every miserable last one of them.

[Balgruuf notices the player's returned.]

Balgruuf You've returned with my axe. I knew that would be his response. As
          soon as you left, I sent word to General Tullius, who's been kind
          enough to lend us some of his troops and Legate Cipius here. Let
          Ulfric try to make it past our combined forces. I'll turn you back
          over to your Legion. Legate Cipius will have use for you. Gods be
          with us all.

          Why side with the Empire?
          
           Mutual advantage! Any fool can see that. For centuries, we have
           benefited from the Empire's protection, and prosperous trade with
           the south. In exchange, the people of Cyrodiil sleep peacefully,
           knowing their northern borders are guarded by the fiercest warriors
           in all Tamriel.

[One seeks out the legate.]

Cipius The Stormcloaks are here. In force. Get down to the front line. This is
        it. We must hold the city. Now move it!

|

|

[As catapult projectiles start bombarding the city, the player reaches the
 front gate, just as Whiterun troops start showing their ugly mugs.]

Rikke This is it men! This is an important day for the Empire and for the
       Legion. And for all of Skyrim. This is the day we send a message to
       Ulfric Stormcloak and the rebel Jarls who support him. But make no
       mistake. What we do here today, we do for Skyrim and her people. By
       cutting out the disease of this rebellion, we will make this country
       whole again! Ready now! Everyone, with me! For the Empire! For the
       Legion!

Whiterun Guard Rrraaaaaggghhhh!

Whiterun Guard Rrraaaaa!

[The squadron prepares to make a stand at the front and only entrance to the
 city.

Hadvar You made it? I was sure I'd find you face down in the dirt.

[After a successful rebuff, which decimates Ulfric's boys, the Jarl himself
 goes down to the battle site to congratulate everyone.]

Balgruuf Revel in your victory here today, even as the gods revel in your
          honor! They already sing of your valor and skill! The halls of
          Sovngarde are no doubt ringing with your praises! In defeating those
          Stormcloak traitors, you have proven the hollowness of their cause
          and the fullness of your hearts. The citizens of Whiterun are forever
          in your debt! But Ulfric will not stop here. No, he will continue to
          strike out against any true Nord who remains faithful to the Empire.
          He will continue to sow discord and chaos wherever he can. And so,
          we must each one of us, continue to fight this insurrection, lest our
          fallen brothers have died for naught! Lest our honor be lessened
          should we allow these bloodthirsty beasts to prowl our lands! Carry
          on men, my gratitude and blessings go with you! For Whiterun! For
          the Empire!

[The soldiers whoop and holler at the praise before dashing back into town.]

Balgruuf Thank you for your role in all of this. It would be my honor should
          you decide to make Whiterun your home. Speak with Proventus. He'll
          make the necessary arrangements.

|

|

[Following the success at Whiterun, one reports back to the general.]

Tullius By defeating Ulfric at Whiterun we have solidified the allegiance of
         the Jarl. Perhaps the Stormcloaks will soon lose heart for this little
         rebellion of theirs once and for all. I'm promoting you to Quaestor.
         Take this blade, a symbol of your new station and responsibility. I'll
         keep an eye on your progress. The Empire rewards excellence, and so do
         I.

Dragonborn What are my new orders, sir?

Tullius You'd be wasted as a regular soldier. I have special plans for you.
         You'll be of greater use to me with greater flexibility. Make your way
         to our hidden military camp in the Pale. Rikke will have important
         tasks for you, and will need you when we reclaim the capital.

         What exactly will I be doing in the field?
         
          You'll be doing whatever Rikke tells you to do. And, I expect you to
          find creative ways to disrupt the Stormcloaks along the way.

         Yes sir.
         
          • For the Emperor!
          • Gods be with you.

|

|

[The player finds the target destination in the snowy northern wilds, finding
 the Imperial bivouac.]

Dragonborn Reporting for duty.

Rikke I need you to deliver some false orders to the Stormcloak commander in
       Dawnstar. But first we need to get our hands on some rebel orders to
       make the forgeries. The Nightgate and Candlehearth Inns are frequent
       stops for Stormcloak runners. See if you can't convince one of those
       innkeepers to help you. One way or another, get me those documents. But
       don't do anything rash if you go to Windhelm. Well, soldier? Can you do
       this?

       I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
       
        Don't take too long figuring it out. I've got a war to run here.

       Consider it done.
       
        • Good luck out there.
        • Good. Make it happen, soldier.

[If one goes to the Nightgate Inn, info is squeezed from the innkeep. Note
 that the proprietor of the Candlehearth, Elda Early-Dawn, has the exact same
 responses and dialogue here.]

Hadring Ah, hello there, traveler. Come to the Nightgate for food or lodging?

Dragonborn Seen any Stormcloak couriers lately?

Hadring I tend to keep my patrons' privacy.

         His life is in danger. (Persuade)
         
          • It is? Well that's different.
          • Yeah, sure it is. You don't fool me.

         
          • Well, if you insist...
          • Seems your purse is lighter than you thought.

         I don't have time for this. I can get rough with you if I have to.
         (Intimidate) |
         
          Now, now! That won't be necessary.

         Never mind.
         
          Hmph.

         He was here, but he left. If you leave now, you can probably catch
         him. Or, you can just wait here. He'll be back soon enough.

[The player tracks down the Stormcloak Courier.]

Courier No time to talk. Out of my way.

         I'm not here to talk. I'm here for those documents.
         
          We'll see about that.

         Never mind.
         
          Hmph.

[With the documents reclaimed, it's back to Rikke.]

Rikke Very good... Let's see what you have here. Interesting... They know more
       of our plans than I expected... It would seem Fort Dunstad is in need
       of reinforcements... We'll make sure they won't be getting those... One
       moment while I correct some of these documents... That should do it.
       Make sure those forged documents get to the Stormcloak commander in
       Dawnstar. It'll throw him off our trail, allowing us to maneuver more
       freely.

       Remind me -- what am I supposed to do?
       
        (repeats Make sure those...)

[The player visits Cmdr. Frorkmar Banner-Torn at the barracks.]

Dragonborn I have some important documents for you, sir.

Frorkmar • Is that so? I don't recognize you. Why aren't you wearing your
            Stormcloak colors?

            Dragonborn Ditched it for this. Easier to sneak past the enemy.

            I suppose it would be. Good thinking.

          All right. Let's take a look... Ah, good. Looks like the
          reinforcements for the fort are on their way. And we have some
          information about enemy troop movements as well. Excellent. It's not
          easy running messages, what with Imperial scouts crawling over the
          place. Well done. Why don't you grab yourself a drink at the Windpeak
          before heading back?

|

|

[One returns to Legate Rikke afterwards.]

Rikke Good job! I knew I gave the mission to the right person.

Dragonborn Reporting for duty.

Rikke Your objective is Fort Dunstad. Meet the soldiers preparing for the
       attack. Then join them in wiping out the rebels. Once you prevail we
       will garrison the fort. Well, soldier? Are you up to the task?

       I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
       
        Don't take too long figuring it out. I've got a war to run here.

       That fort is as good as ours.
       
        I knew I could count on you, soldier.

[One goes to meet the small band of raiders outside the fort. Together, they
 and other guerilla groups attack en masse, overwhelming the Stormcloaks and
 stealing the fort. With good tidings, it's time to report to the general.]

Tullius Taking the Pale gives us another port in Dawnstar, and puts us within
         striking distance of Windhelm. That should make Ulfric a bit more
         cautious, eh? Battles are won by trained and disciplined men. Wars
         are won by talented and exceptional individuals. I'm raising you to
         Praefect. Take this blade, as a gift and symbol of your new rank.
         You've earned it.

Dragonborn What are my new orders, sir?

Tullius Make your way to our camp in the Rift. We have a few surprises for
         the Stormcloaks lined up.

         What exactly will I be doing in the field?
         
          You'll be doing whatever Rikke tells you to do. And, I expect you to
          find creative ways to disrupt the Stormcloaks along the way.

         Yes sir.
         
          For the Empire!

|

|

[The player next reaches the camp, south of Ivarstead and the Throat of the
 World. Rikke has once again spearheaded the operation here.]

Dragonborn Reporting for duty.

Rikke You're going to Riften. My spies report the Jarl's steward, Anuriel, has
       arrangements with the Thieves Guild that would be rather embarrassing if
       made public. I need you to find evidence of her corrupt activities, and
       use it to gain a measure of her cooperation. This will require stealth
       and discretion. The Jarl's guards won't take kindly to anyone rummaging
       through her Steward's private quarters.

       I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
       
        Don't take too long figuring it out. I've got a war to run here.

       I'll get proof...and Anuriel's cooperation.
       
        Good. I can always count on you, can't I?

[One visits Riften's Mistveil Keep and finds an incriminating letter in the
 steward's bureau. Then it's time to threaten her.]

Dragonborn Recognize this? (Show her incriminating letter)

Anuriel Not here. Come with me. Stay close and the guards will leave you
         alone.

[She leads the player to her chambers.]

Anuriel I suppose you're here to extort something from me? Is that it? Well,
         what is it you want?

         You rebels are doing a fine job destroying yourselves. Soldiers
         running errands? |
         
          So. You're an Imperial spy... Interesting... I have no strong love
          for the Stormcloaks but I can't say I'm all that fond of the Empire,
          either. This war of yours makes it different for a resourceful woman
          to advance her interests. Perhaps we can find a way for both of us
          to prosper from this unfortunate discovery?

         What if this letter were made public?
         
          It would ruin me. I have a good thing going here. The Jarl benefits
          from my more creative arrangements as well, though it'd be impossible
          for her to admit that. Laila is a simple and traditional woman. Which
          makes it easy to manipulate her, but impossible to regain her graces
          once offended. Look. Perhaps we could come to some kind of
          arrangement?

Dragonborn What kind of agreement did you have in mind?

Anuriel What if I told you about a large shipment of gold and weapons?

          Go on. I'm listening.
          
           Oh, no. I'm no fool. You'll learn what you need to know once we've
           come to an agreement.

           And what about something for me, right now? (Persuade)
           
            Well I...I suppose I'm not left much choice in the matter, am I?
            Very well. I trust a hefty purse of septims will suffice?

          How much are we talking about?
          
           Enough to make a significant difference in the war.

          All right, it's a deal. Where can I find this shipment?
          
           They're taking it by wagon to Windhelm. If you hurry, you'll catch
           them before they get far. It'll be a fairly slow moving¹ caravan.
           The shipment is quite heavy, and guarded by many men.

          Now, let's pretend we never had this discussion.

[The player delivers the news to the legate.]

Rikke Something to report?

Dragonborn Anuriel says there's a shipment of coin traveling to Windhelm...

Rikke Excellent work. I knew you'd bring back something useful. It just so
       happens, I've got some scouts along the road. Meet up with them, and
       together see if you can't overpower the caravan.

[The troops are near Shor's Watchtower. Hadvar is helping them.]

Hadvar I remember you...you were with us at Helgen, and Whiterun. Glad to have
        you with us. How are you?

        I'm all right, I guess. How are you?
        
         Good to hear.

        I've been better. And you?
        
         These are dark days. But at least we know we're doing our part to
         make things better, eh? I guess I'm doing all right.

        I need this to go well. This is my first real command since they
        promoted me after Whiterun. You know, some nights when I close my eyes,
        I see the battle stretched out before me, like I'm still there... Do
        the men you've killed haunt you? Mine do...

         Only a beast kills without feeling.
         
          I suppose you're right...they say it gets easier... I'm not sure if
          that's a good thing...

         If you hadn't killed them, they would have killed you.
         
          That's what I keep telling myself.

         But, never mind all that. What brings you out this way?

        There's an enemy wagon loaded with coin and weapons. We need to capture
        it. |
        
         Really? It just so happens we've been tracking a wagon! For about a
         day now. So that's what's in there? Coins and weapons? How do you know
         that?

         I blackmailed Anuriel for the information.
         
          That was crafty. I'm sure having a steward in the pocket will come
          in handy. Lucky for us, that wagon recently had a little accident.

         It doesn't matter.
         
          Oh, fine. Keep your secrets. I see how it is. That wagon recently
          had a little accident.

         They're stranded now. Just up the road! We're outnumbered, but I have
         a plan. You got here just in time.

Dragonborn What's the plan?

Hadvar First, we're going to take out their sentry, then we'll situate
        ourselves overlooking their camp. Next, you'll infiltrate their
        position and get their attention while we hit them with a barrage of
        arrows. With a bit of luck, we'll catch them completely off guard and
        even the odds a little.

        I have a better plan. You wait here, and I'll take care of it.
        
         All right, if you insist. But we'll come running if it sounds like
         things have gotten out of hand.

        Let's wait a little longer.
        
         Let me know when you're ready.

        Ready. Let's go.
        
         Good.

[If they agree to fight as a team...]

Hadvar There's a sentry patrolling the hill. We'll go in quiet and drop him
        a combined arrow barrage. Keep low, fire on my word. Fire!

[The player kills the sentry quietly.]

Hadvar All right. You infiltrate their camp, we'll cover you from the ridge.

[Either way, after slaying the Stormcloaks]

Hadvar We make quite a team, eh? I'll stay here and guard the shipment. You
        get back to camp with news. Have them send some men -- with a new
        wagon. This one isn't going anywhere.

|

|

[One goes back to Rikke.]

Rikke Good work. I'll send some men with a wagon to collect the prize. We
       can use the weapons here, and I'll pass on the coin to Solitude.

Dragonborn Reporting for duty.

Rikke Your objective is Fort Greenwall. Meet the soldiers preparing for the
       attack. Then join them in wiping out the rebels. Once you prevail we
       will garrison the fort. Well, soldier? Are you up to the task?

       I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
       
        Don't take too long figuring it out. I've got a war to run here.

       That fort is as good as ours.
       
        I knew I could count on you, soldier.

[As before, one goes visits the fort and slays its Stormcloak inhabitants. As
 they lie bleeding, it's time to revisit the general for due accolades.]

Tullius Taking control of the Rift was a great victory. Ulfric must be rather
         nervous with us so close to his door step¹.

Dragonborn What are my new orders, sir?

Tullius You're needed in Winterhold. Report to our hidden camp there.

         What exactly will I be doing in the field?
         
          You'll be doing whatever Rikke tells you to do. And, I expect you to
          find creative ways to disrupt the Stormcloaks along the way.

         Yes sir.
         
          • Gods be with you.
          • For the Empire!

[The player can inquire about the hostilies' state.]

Dragonborn How goes the war?

Tullius There's not much up there, but if we can regain Winterhold, our
         proximity to Windhelm should keep Ulfric wary and wasting troops
         garrisoned at home. By holding onto Falkreath, we control access to
         the Reach, Whiterun, and the Rift. Ulfric will try for it soon. We'll
         be there to stop him.

Dragonborn What will it take to end the war?

Tullius Ulfric Stormcloak's head rolling away from his lifeless body.

|

|

[As usual, one meets Rikke at the designated camp.]

Dragonborn Reporting for duty.

Rikke Your objective is Fort Kastav. The rebels are keeping some of our men
       prisoner there. I aim to turn that into an advantage. I've sent men to
       scout the area. You are to meet them, find a way to slip in, free our
       men, and take over the fort. They won't be expecting an attack from the
       inside. This won't be easy, but that's why I'm sending you. Think you
       can handle it?

       I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
       
        Don't take too long figuring it out. I've got a war to run here.

       That fort is as good as ours.
       
        • I knew I could count on you, soldier.
        • Show the rebels the futility of their cause.

[Upon arrival, the player finds the scouting party is lead by Hadvar.]

Hadvar Hey there! Can you believe this place? So cold my breath turns to
        icicles! What are we even doing up here? Guess Tullius wants to make
        sure everything's locked down before launching a serious campaign for
        Eastmarch. Anyway, I'm glad you're here. We're outnumbered again, more
        so than when we took that wagon. But if we work together, we can pull
        this off.

Dragonborn What's the plan?

Hadvar There's a grate outside the wall. Looks like it used to be buried in
        snow. I don't think they know it's there. From the look of it, I'd bet
        it leads straight into the prison. I need you to sneak in there, and
        free our men, killing anyone inside as you go. Once you've rescued the
        prisoners, head out to the courtyard. We'll stand guard out here and
        rush in as soon as we hear fighting.

        I'm on it.
        
         Talos preserve you.

        I'm not much for sneaking.
        
         I have faith in you. But, if you find more trouble than you can
         handle, run out to the courtyard. We'll come as soon as we hear
         fighting.

[The player finds the grate, infiltrating the prison as expected. No guards
 are around, but the prisoners are all up and at 'em.]

Imperial Soldier Hey!

Imperial Soldier Hurry!

[The player frees them and they reclaim their confiscated gear, killing any
 Stormcloaks en route to the courtyard. The rest soon fall as well.]

Hadvar Great work! Get back and report our success. I'll stay here and clean
        up the mess. Glad you were here. Couldn't have done it without you!

[One reports back to Solitude.]

Tullius Now that we have Winterhold, I can garrison some troops there until
         I'm ready to march on Windhelm. I have come to rely heavily on you.
         It is only fitting that you join the upper eschelon. I am hereby
         elevating you to the rank of Legate. On behalf of the Empire, and
         myself, please accept this gift along with your new rank. 
         Congratulations.

Dragonborn What's next?

Tullius You've little time to glory in your accomplishments. We're gathering
         for our final assault on Windhelm. Report to our camp in Eastmarch.

|

|

[Rikke is found in the mountainside camp near Mzulft.]

Dragonborn Reporting for duty.

Rikke Your objective is the enemy held¹ fort. Meet the soldiers preparing for
       the attack. Then join them in wiping out the rebels. Once you prevail
       we will garrison the fort. Well, soldier? Are you up to the task?

       I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
       
        Don't take too long figuring it out. I've got a war to run here.

       That fort is as good as ours.
       
        I knew I could count on you, soldier.

[The player visits Fort Amol, a riverside holding in the Eastmarch hills. The
 orchestrated assault works perfectly, as usual. One reports back to Rikke.]

Rikke Good job! I knew I gave the mission to the right person.

Dragonborn Reporting in.

Rikke We're taking the city. Meet the soldiers gathering for the attack. Move
       it!

|

|

[The player meets the men and Tullius at Windhelm's bridge entrance. He takes
 no time in rousing his men to glory.]

Tullius All right! It's time to deliver the final blow to the Stormcloak
         rebellion! You have all fought bravely, and sacrificed much to bring
         us to this point. Ulfric thinks he can hide behind the walls of his
         castle. But we will fight our way in and drag him out through the
         rubble to face justice. Because this is the end for them, the
         Stormcloaks will fight like cornered rats. They will be fierce and
         crafty. But they are no match for Legionnaires. You are the best and
         the brightest warriors in Tamriel. Professional soldiers, fearless and
         devastating. The Emperor will be paying close attention to what
         happens here today. Men who distinguish themelves will be well
         rewarded. Ready now! Everyone, with me! For the Empire! For the
         Legion! Rrrrrraaaaaaaaaaaaaahhhhhhh!!!!

[With the attack orders given, the stone town of Windhelm quickly becomes a
 bloodbath, everyone trading blows in the bonfires and rubble. Eventually, the
 herds are thinned and the Imperials fight to the Palace of the Kings. Ulfric
 sits leisurely at his throne. Tullius and Rikke follow the player.]

Tullius Secure the door.

Rikke Already done, sir.

Tullius Ulfric Stormcloak! You are guilty of insurrection, murder of Imperial
         citizens, the assassination of King Torygg, and high treason against
         the Empire. It's over.

Galmar Not while I'm still standing, it's not.

Rikke Step aside, Galmar. We're here to accept Ulfric's surrender.

Ulfric I'll never surrender Skyrim to the hands of a corrupt and dying Empire.

Rikke Skyrim doesn't belong to you, Ulfric.

Ulfric No... But I belong to her.

Tullius Enough! You are traitors and will die traitors' deaths. Stand down and
         face public execution, or advance and face summary execution by my
         hands. It matters little to me. Either way I'll be sending your heads
         back to Cyrodiil.

Galmar Well? What are we waiting for?

[They brandish their weapons, starting the final battle.]

Tullius Die villain!

Ulfric Talos smite you!

[Galmar is slain, and Ulfric terribly wounded.]

Tullius Well Ulfric, you can't escape from me this time. Any last requests
         before I send you to...to wherever you people go when you die.

Rikke Sovngarde...sir.

Tullius Right. Well?

Ulfric Let the Dragonborn be the one to do it. It'll make for a better song.

Tullius Song or not, I just want it done.

         I've had my fair share of killing today.
         
          Well, I'm not quite done myself.

         I won't give him the satisfaction.
         
          Fine by me.

         I'll gladly kill him.
         
          Here, use my sword to do it. I made sure to sharpen it for the
          occasion.

[Ulfric's death sentence is carried out by the player or Tullius.]

Ulfric Aggh..¹

Rikke Talos be with you...

Tullius What was that, Legate?

Rikke Nothing. Just saying goodbye.

Tullius Well, the men will be expecting some kind of speech. And we'll need
         to hand the city over to that Free-Winter fellow.

Rikke Brunwulf. Yes, I've sent men to protect him and bring him here. Windhelm
       will need a government quickly if we are to prevent more violence.

Tullius The Legion will be staying here for quite some time. I don't expect
         there to be any further violence.

[He turns to the player.]

Tullius Oh, and Legate. It's been an honor to have you at my side. As a token
         of my appreciation, I want you to keep my sword. And now, to deliver
         a speech.

[Everyone goes outside to the waiting Imperial throng.]

Tullius His head will be sent to Cyrodiil where it will adorn a spike on the
         walls of the Imperial City. Let this day be a final warning to all
         who would still call themselves Stormcloaks. We are turning the city
         over to Brunwulf Free-Winter, an honorable and faithful man. Many of
         you will be staying in Windhelm to aid the Jarl in restoring order
         and stamping out any embers of rebellion that may still smolder here.
         In appreciation for your exemplary service, I am doubling your pay and
         compensation to the widows of your fallen comrades.

Imperial Soldiers Rrrraaaaaaggghhh!

Tullius I am proud of all of you. All hail the Emperor! All hail his
         Legionnaires!

Imperial Soldiers Rrrraaaaaaggghhh!

Tullius I hate giving speeches.

Rikke It wasn't so bad.

Tullius I hope we haven't just created a martyr.

Rikke There's bound to be resistance. There are many Stormcloak camps tucked
       away in the hills. They'll no doubt strike whenever and wherever they
       can. But without Ulfric to inflame their passions, they'll settle down
       and return to their homes eventually.

Tullius I pray you're right, Legate. In the meantime, we'll continue to root
         them out and put them to the sword.

[He turns to the player.]

Tullius We couldn't have done this without you. The Empire glories in your
         accomplishments... Come, Rikke. There's still much to be done.

[Tullius can be asked about the aftermath.]

Dragonborn Now that Ulfric is dead, will there be peace?

Tullius The fiercest of the remaining rebels will continue to harass us, but
         by in¹ large, the people here desire peace. What I'm not so sure about
         is the peace we've made with the Thalmor. But we'll kee that between
         the two of us, alright?

Dragonborn Will you return to Cyrodiil now?

Tullius No, I suspect Skyrim to be my home for many years. Can't say I'll ever
         get used to the damn cold, or understand these Nords...but, I've come
         to respect them. The harshness of Skyrim has a way of carving a man
         down to his true self.

Dragonborn Is there anything further I can do for the Legion?

Tullius Ulfric is dead and his army destroyed. There's not much more I could
         ask of you. The gods, however, I suspect, may have plans for you
         elsewhere. That said, Stormcloak true believers are still operating
         out of hidden military camps in the hills. If you encounter any on
         you¹ travels, kill them. With luck, they'll soon lose heart and return
         to their homes and families. If not, we'll be forced to put them all
         to the sword.

[Rikke can be asked about the aftermath.]

Dragonborn Now that Ulfric is dead, will there be peace?

Rikke There are those who still call themselves Stormcloaks, who continue to
       fight us, and bring misery to the people...but they are few in number.
       The ordinary citizen will be happy to get back to life as normal, to
       have their families return home. And they should enjoy it while they
       can...I suspect all of Tamriel will againb e called to arms in the not
       too distant future.

Dragonborn What's next for the accomplished Legate Rikke?

Rikke The General's put me in charge of assisting the new governments. I may
       understand things here in Skyrim better than the General, but I'm a
       soldier at heart, not a politician. But I'll do my best. This is the
       land of my birth, the land that shaped me. I'm proud to have any part
       in making it strong again.

Dragonborn Is there anything further I can do for the Legion?

Rikke The Legion's work is far from finished, but you are free to roam. I
       suspect you'll be of greater good to Skyrim out there, in the world.
       If while you're out there, you stumble into any Stormcloak military
       camps, I expect you to destroy them. I've reports they are hiding in the
       hills.

[Like the Imperial side, one overhears talk of joining the Stormcloaks, based
 out of Windhelm. If it catches one's fancy, a visit to the Palace of the Kings
 is necessary to get the ball rolling. There, Ulfric and his housecarl, Galmar
 Stone-Fist, will be talking.]

Galmar If he's not with us, he's against us.

Ulfric He knows that. They all know that.

Galmar How long are you going to wait?

Ulfric You think I need to send Balgruuf a stronger message.

Galmar If by message you mean shoving a sword through his gullet.

Ulfric Taking his city and leaving him in disgrace would make a more powerful
        statement, don't you think?

Galmar So we're ready to start this war in earnest then?

Ulfric Soon.

Galmar I still say you should take them all out like you did Deadking Torygg.

Ulfric Torygg was merely a message to the other Jarls. Whoever we replace them
        with will need the support of our armies.

Galmar We're ready when you are.

Ulfric Things hinge on Whiterun. If we can take the city without bloodshed¹
        all the better. But if not...

Galmar The people are behind you.

Ulfric Many I fear still need convincing.

Galmar Then let them die with their false kings.

Ulfric We've been soldiers a long time. We know the price of freedom. The
        people are still weighing things in their hearts.

Galmar What's left of Skyrim to wager? 

Ulfric They have families to think of.

Galmar How many of their sons and daughters follow your banner? We are their
        families.

Ulfric Well put, friend. Tell me, Galmar, why do you fight for me?

Galmar I'd follow you into the depths of Oblivion, you know that.

Ulfric Yes, but why do you fight? If not for me, what then?

Galmar I'll die before elves dictate the fates of men. Are we not one in this?

Ulfric I fight for the men I've held in my arms, dying on foreign soil. I
        fight for their wives and children, who's¹ names I heard whispered in
        their last breaths. I fight for we few who did come home, only to find
        our country full of strangers wearing familiar faces. I fight for my
        people impoverished to pay the debts of an Empire too weak to rule
        them, yet brands them criminals for wanting to rule themselves! I fight
        so that all the fighting I've already done hasn't been for nothing. I
        fight...because I must.

Galmar Your words give voice to what we all feel, Ulfric. And that's why you
        will be High King. But the day words are enough, will be the day
        soldiers like us are no longer needed.

Ulfric I would gladly retire from the world were such a day to dawn.

Galmar Aye. But in the meantime, we have a war to plan.

[The player walks over.]

Ulfric Only the foolish or the courageous approach the Jarl without summons...
        Do I know you?

        I believe we've already met.
        
         Is that so...? Ah yes, you were with us at Helgen.

        I was at Helgen.
        
         Ahhh. Yes...

        Destined for the chopping block if I'm not mistaken.

        I helped Ralof escape. He said he'd vouch for me.
        
         Ralof's alive? I hope that's true. He's a damn good man. But he hasn't
         returned yet, so I'll need to wait for his account. For now, speak
         with Galmar.

        I was set free. I could've gone anywhere. I came here to fight the
        Empire. |
        
         A fair point... Well, you've come to the right place, then. Speak
         with Galmar.

        I'm always looking for able fighters. Not everyone can say they made it
        out of Helgen. Seems we're all branded villains these days... So long
        as your criminal past stays in the past, and you fight for me with
        honor and integrity, we'll welcome you into our ranks.

[If one is far enough in the main quest, Ulfric may instead say this, before
 giving the usual chatty options]

Ulfric I remember you... You were at Helgen with us! Come to join the war?
        Speak with Galmar. He handles the new recruits.

        Yes, sir.
        
         Good.

        That's not why I'm here.
        
         I'm sorry to hear that. If you change your mind, speak with Galmar.
         What does bring you to me?

[One finds Galmar nearby.]

Galmar Hmm. Helgen, eh? Ulfric told us quite the story. If you made it through
        that, you're likely worth something to me. But first, tell me. Why's a
        foreigner want to fight or Skyrim?

        Skyrim is my home.
        
         Fair enough. But are you willing to die for your home?

        I want to fight the Empire. I'll bleed for the chance to do so.
        
         Can't fault anyone for that! As long as you hate the Empire as much
         as I do, that I can work with.

Dragonborn That's why I'm here. I want to join.

Galmar All right. But before I can put you to use, I need to know how much
        you can take. I have a little test for you.

        I can handle anything you throw at me.
        
         That's what I like to hear. So long as you can back up those words
         with steel.

        What kind of test?
        
         The kind men use to measure themselves.

        I'm sending you to Serpentstone Island. If you survive, you pass. If
        you die, well, you weren't going to be much use to me anyway.

Dragonborn What's at Serpentstone Island?

Galmar It's where men have tested their mettle for ages. There's a strange
        rock formation there, built by the ancients. Something about that
        place attracts the Ice Wraiths. You kill an Ice Wraith out there, and
        I'll have the proof I need about you.

        Does every recruit have to do this?
        
         Only the ones I'm not sure about. This will prove your abilities, but
         more importantly, it will prove your commitment.

        I'm going alone?
        
         • Not so sure of yourself after all?

         At the end of the day, every warrior is alone. Before you can stand
         next to your shield brother, you need to be able to stand on your own.

        I'm not sure about this.
        
         When you kill that Ice Wraith, then we'll talk about you becoming a
         Stormcloak.

        I'm off to kill that Ice Wraith. I'll be back soon.
        
         We'll see about that, won't we?

[The glacial island is found off the northeast coast of Skyrim. Sure enough,
 ice wraiths spawn there. One returns to Galmar after slaying the beastie.
 Him and the Jarl are discussing another matter fervently.]

Ulfric Tell me again why we're wasting time and resources chasing a legend. We
        don't even know it exists!

Galmar The Jarls are upset. They don't all support you.

Ulfric Damn the Jarls.

Galmar They demand the Moot.

Ulfric And damn the Moot! We should risk letting those milkdrinkers put
        Torygg's woman on the throne? She'll hand Skyrim over to the elves on
        a silver plate.

Galmar All the more reason then. The crown would legitimize your claim.

Ulfric A crown doesn't make a king.

Galmar No, but this one...

Ulfric If it even exists.

Galmar It exists. And it'll be the symbol of the righteousness of our cause.
        Think about it. The Jagged Crown! It heralds back to a time before
        jarls and moots. Back to a time when a king was a king because his
        enemies fell before him, and his people rose because they loved him.
        Skyrim needs that king. You will be that king, Ulfric. You must be.

Ulfric You're certain you've found it?

Galmar When have I ever been false with you?

Ulfric Fine. I'll send the Unblooded here with you. Fancy a crawl through a
        moldering dungeon to see if you can't stir up Galmar's Jagged Crown?

Galmar It'll be there. You'll see.

[They finish talking. Galmar walks over.]

Galmar You're alive. I owe Ulfric a drink. I have to admit, I didn't think
        we'd be seeing you again. I misjudged you. You're definitely Stormcloak
        material. It's time we made this official. You ready to take the Oath?

        Are you saying you sent me out there to die?
        
         Not at all. That was as much a test of your abilities as it was your
         resolve. I wasn't sure your heart was in it. But you've proven me
         wrong. And I respect that. Now, if were¹ done being sentimental, it's
         time for you to take the Oath.

        Oath?
        
         Before you're one of us, you must swear fealty to Jarl Ulfric
         Stormcloak, future High King of Skyrim. You must also pledge
         unswerving loyalty to your fellow Stormcloaks, to Skyrim and to her
         people.

        Isn't it enough that I want to fight Imperials?
        
         You can stick a sword through an Imperial any day you want. But that
         doesn't make you a Stormcloak. We're not just fighting Imperials.
         We're fighting to restore Skyrim to her glory and give her the king
         she deserves.

        I need to think it over.
        
         Don't take too long figuring it out. Might mistake your hesitation
         for Imperial sympathies. Come back when you're committed to the cause,
         or go join the Legion. They're taking anyone with a pulse these days.

        I'm ready to take the Oath.
        
         That's the spirit.

[The player agrees to take the oath.]

Galmar By swearing this oath, you become one of us. A hero of the people. A
        true son of Skyrim. A Stormcloak. Repeat after me. I do swear my
        blood and honor to the service of Ulfric Stormcloak...

Dragonborn I do swear my blood and honor to the service of Ulfric
            Stormcloak...

Galmar ...Jarl of Windhelm and true High King of Skyrim.

Dragonborn ...Jarl of Windhelm and true High King of Skyrim.

Galmar As Talos is my witness, may this oath bind me to death and beyond...

Dragonborn As Talos is my witness, may this oath bind me to death and
            beyond...

Galmar ...even to my lord as to my fellow brothers and sisters in arms.

Dragonborn ...even to my lord as to my fellow brothers and sisters in arms.

Galmar All hail the Stormcloaks, the true sons and daughters of Skyrim!

Dragonborn All hail the Stormcloaks, the true sons and daughters of Skyrim!

Galmar Now you're one of us. Which means you get to tag along on a little trip
        with me. Oh, and here. You're a Stormcloak now, you ought to look the
        part.

Dragonborn What's the mission?

Galmar I have found the final resting place of the Jagged Crown. Can you
        believe it? Well, I'm almost certain. We're headed to Korvanjund. But,
        if old King Borgas is indeed buried there, we're bound to run into
        trouble of some kind. Your fellow Stormcloaks are already assembling
        outside the tomb. I'll meet you there as soon as I'm finished up here.
        Don't wait around for me. I bet I'll beat you to Korvanjund even though
        you start first.

[The player can inquire further.]

Dragonborn What's the Jagged Crown?

Galmar Have you not heard that ancient verse? Maw unleashing razor snow, Of
        dragons from the blue brought down, Births the walking winter's woe,
        The High King in his Jagged Crown. Going way back to King Harald's
        time or even before, the High King always wore the Jagged Crown. It
        was the symbol of his might and power. The crown is made from the
        bones and teeth of ancient dragons, and it is said to contain a portion
        of the power of every king who has worn it. True or not, who would dare
        deny Ulfric's claim, when the legendary Jagged Crown sits upon his
        brow?

Dragonborn How do you know the crown is in Korvanjund?

Galmar It's true, the location of the crown was lost with King Borgas. After
        the Great Hunt killed him, while he was off on his damned Alessian
        campaigns. But legend holds, his body was secretly returned to Skyrim
        and buried with the crown. Its exact whereabouts lost in the following
        Wars of Succession. Through sources that shall remain nameless, I've
        tracked down what I believe to be the final resting place of King
        Borgas -- Korvanjund. If the crown exists, it will be there.

Dragonborn You anticipate danger?

Galmar Aye. The Great Hunt killed old King Borgas. Gods only know with what
        profane arts those elves cursed his remains. Curses nonwithstanding,
        the tombs of kings are always full of traps to ward off grave robbers,
        are they not? But nothing a band of Stormcloaks can't handle, I assure
        you.

[They arrive at the snowy tomb, about halfway between Whiterun and Windhelm.
 Galmar and his troops are waiting nearby. Ralof, met during the game's first
 chapter, will run over at this point.]

Ralof Ha, I knew you'd join up! Great news. We'll take back Skyrim together,
       eh? I'm glad I'll have you beside me in there. This place chills my
       blood, and I don't care who knows it.

Dragonborn What are you talking about?

Ralof These old ruins... My father always told me to stay away from them. Good
       advice, I'd say. But never mind all that. We've got a job to do, and
       nothing's going to stand in our way.

[They walk to the main group together.]

Galmar Hail, Ilfhild.

Stormcloak Soldier Hail, Galmar.

Galmar What's the situation?

S. Soldier Cold as the inside of an ice wraith. That and some Imperials are
            camped out around the entrance, staying nice and warm around their
            fires.

Galmar Imperials? Well, if they're keeping themselves comfortable, let's slip
        in and send them to their graves that way.

[Galmar sees the player's arrived.]

Galmar What's the Legion doing here? Damn Imperial spies... Well, should be
        fun for us, at least. They don't seem to know we're here yet. Ready to
        spill some Imperial blood for Skyrim?

        Hold on. I need a minute.
        
         Even the Imperials might eventually decide to patrol their perimeter.
         Get yourself ready!

        I'm ready. Let's go get them.
        
         That's what I like to hear.

        Listen up. Those Imperials aren't here by coincidence. Their spies
        must have found out we know about the Crown, and they don't want us
        to have it. But they won't stand in our way. I know some of you are
        ex-legion¹ and may know men on the other side. But remember this. They
        are the enemy now and they will not hesitate to kill you. Keep your
        wits about you and watch your shield brother's back. Ulfric Stormcloak
        is counting on us to bring him back that crown, and that's exactly what
        we are going to do. Follow me. Quickly and quietly now. I want their
        guts on the ground before they even know we're here.

[They slaughter the gate guards and slip inside undetected.]

Galmar Pick a man and put him down. We attack on my signal. Time to show what
        you're really made of. For Skyrim!

[They slay the nearby patrolmen.]

Galmar Gretta, Engar, stay and guard the entrance. We don't want any Imperial
        reinforcements taking us by surprise. The rest of you lot are with me.

[They soon reach a long, thin stairway.]

Galmar I don't like the look of this. Perfect spot for an ambush. Ten to one
        they're just waiting for us on the other side.

Stormcloak Soldier But there isn't any other way through.

Galmar You sure about that? Then please, be my guest and go strolling on in
        there. We'll stay here and watch your back... Not so sure? Oh, then
        perhaps we should take a moment to look around a little, eh? You there,
        Unblooded, see if you can find another way through. We'll charge in to
        help as soon as we hear fighting. There may be some way to get through
        on the level above. Hurry!

[Using the upper route, the player reconnoiters, overhearing two sentries.]

Imperial 1 You hear anything?

Imperial 2 No, but I know they're out there. No other way they can come. Now
            shut up or you'll blow our ambush.

Imperial 1 I don't like it. What are they waiting for?

Imperial 2 Maybe they're so scared of you they ran away.

Imperial 1 Hardly likely.

Imperial 2 Just shut up and keep out of sight.

[The player attacks.]

Imperial Soldier It must be the Stormcloaks! Attack!

[They slay 'em.]

Galmar Careful, boys. There's bound to be more up ahead.

[They pick off a straggler. Nearby is a draugr and a fresh corpse.]

Stormcloak 1 What in the nine holds is that?

Stormcloak 2 Draugr. Ain't you ever seen one before?

Stormcloak 1 No. And I'm not sure I'm better off for it now neither.

Galmar Steady. A few dusty bonewalkers aren't going to stop us anymore than
        the Imperials could. We're not leaving until we get what we came for.
        Now let's keep moving.

[They progress deeper into the crypt, coming upon the tunnel and puzzle lock.]

Galmar Ah! The Hall of Stories...we must be getting close now.

Stormcloak 1 Oh...I've heard of this. They say these walls show the history of
              the ancients who built this place.

Stormcloak 2 Too bad we can't read these carvings. Who knows what secrets
              we'd uncover?

Galmar One thing at a time. We're here for the Crown. Any of these carvings
        show a crown?

[An Imperial corpse is nearby.]

Galmar Hmm, looks like this is as far as the Imperials got. Even if one of
        these pictures tells us where the Crown is, I'm betting we're going to
        have to find a way through that door. See what you can figure out,
        Unblooded. I'm going to check out these carvings over here. Let me know
        if you find something.

[The corpse has a claw nearby.]

Galmar Hmm...that looks like some kind of claw from a statue. I wonder what
        it's used for.

[Using the claw, the puzzle door's opened.]

Galmar Good job! Alright everyone! Keep your guard up. No telling what we'll
        find down here.

[They reach a larger chamber.]

Galmar Come on, boys. Let's spread out and see what we've got. Unblooded, do
        what you do best. See if you can find some way to get that gate open.

[A lever up top opens the gate.]

Galmar That's done it! Alright, boys, let's get moving. We've got more...

[Draugr pop out of the coffins.]

Stormcloak Look out! Draugr!

Galmar Steady now! They may be uglier than Imperials but they'll go down just
        the same.

[The undead are laid to rest.]

Galmar Let's hope that's the last of them. Come on, let's see what's down
        this way.

[Finally, the team comes across the deepest tomb.]

Galmar The crown must be around here somewhere. Spread out, and keep your eyes
        open.

Ralof Hey, I found a crown over here on this corpse. Is this the one we're
       looking for?

Galmar Ralof...get away from there, fool!

[High-level draugr reanimate nearby. Afterwards, the player finds the Crown.]

Galmar Get to Windhelm with the crown as quick as you can. Tell Ulfric he owes
        me a drink. We'll stick around here for a while and see if we can find
        anything else useful.

[The headgear is delivered to Ulfric personally.]

Dragonborn Here's the Jagged Crown. I believe you owe Galmar a drink?

Ulfric Damn him -- the old bear was right! Did you run into any trouble?

        Nothing I couldn't handle.
        
         That's the spirit. I'll get all the details from Galmar when he gets
         back.

        We lost a lot of good men. I hope it was worth it.
        
         The blood of our fallen heroes will make Skyrim free, never doubt it.
         Also, never doubt me or Galmar.

        The Imperials were there ahead of us.
        
         Damn it. What were they doing there? Imperial spies are everywhere.
         Never forget that... I trust you gave them a thrashing? 

        Now then... I'm glad you're here. I have a message I need delivered to
        the Jarl of Whiterun. Deliver this axe to Balgruuf the Greater.

        An axe?
        
         Yes. An axe. How long have you been in Skyrim.¹ Give the man my axe.
         If he keeps it, I will bide my time. If he returns it to you, it means
         war.

        Should I say anything to him?
        
         Men who understand each other often have no need for words. There are
         but a few simple truths behind one warrior giving another his axe.
         Balgruuf will know my meaning.

Dragonborn Understood.

Ulfric Keep your wits about you. The Jarl of Whiterun is known for his temper.

|

|

[The Jarl's sought out at Dragonsreach, the hilltop castle overlooking his
 fair city.]

Dragonborn Jarl Ulfric Stormcloak asked me to deliver this axe to you.

Balgruuf Did he now? The man is persistent, I'll give him that.

          • But until that dragon's dealt with, Ulfric's just going to have to
            wait. For now, I'll hold onto this axe. But it's a tenuous peace at
            best. Now I believe you have some business to conclude with my
            court wizard?

          • I suppose it's time I give him an answer... Proventus, what do you
            make of all this? If Ulfric were to attack Whiterun...

Proventus As in all things, Lord, caution...I urge us to wait and see.

Irileth Prey waits.

Balgruuf I'm of a mind with Irileth. It's time to act.

Proventus You plan to march on Windhelm?

Balgruuf I'm not a fool, Proventus. I mean it's time to challenge Ulfric to
          face me as a man, or march his Stormcloaks up to the gates.

Proventus He'll do no such thing! A dagger in the back is all you could
           expect!

Irileth He was rather straight forward¹ with Torygg.

Proventus Torygg? He simply walked up to the boy and murdered him!

Irileth That boy was the High King of Skyrim.

Balgruuf I'm not the High King, but neither am I a boy. If Ulfric wants to
          challenge my rule in the old way, let him. Though I suspect he'll
          prefer to send his Stormcloaks to do it for him.

Irileth True. He's already proven his personal strength. Now he seeks to prove
         his army's.

Proventus Then might I urge you to consider General Tullius's request? I mean,
           if you are bent on offending Jarl Ulfric...

Irileth Ulfric is the one who has offended. But, Proventus has a point. Ulfric
         has made it clear. In his mind, to refuse his claim is to side with
         the Empire.

Proventus And what harm is there in letting a few Legionnaires die in place
           of your own men?

Balgruuf It seems cowardly.

Irileth Was it cowardly then to accept the White-Gold Concordat?

Balgruuf This again?! That was different. Was I given a chance to object to
          the terms of the treaty? No. The Jarls weren't asked. We were told.
          And we had to like it.

Proventus The chests of gold didn't hurt.

Balgruuf Dammit! This isn't about gold!

Irileth It's time to decide.

Proventus Lord, wait. Let us see if Ulfric is serious.

Balgruuf Oh, he's serious. But so am I.

Irileth Finally.

Balgruuf So about this axe... You can return this axe to our friend. The
          esteemed Jarl of Windhelm has my answer. Make sure he gets it.
          Proventus. Bring me my pen. And the good parchment.

Proventus Are we writing a letter, Lord?

Balgruuf Yes, to General Tullius. I need to make a few things clear before I
          accept these Legionnaires of his.

[One returns to Ulfric with the grim tidings.]

Dragonborn The Jarl of Whiterun returns your axe.

Ulfric Then I was wrong about him. You were right¹ Galmar.

Galmar Again?

Ulfric I'm in no mood to joke.

Galmar Give the word, my lord, and Whiterun is yours.

Ulfric Whiterun is only a means to an end.

Galmar I've toured our camps. We're ready, Ulfric... Whenever you are.

Ulfric Is a man ever ready to give the orders that will mean the deaths of
        many.¹

Galmar No. But neither is every man able to give that order when he must. But
        you are that man, Ulfric. You've been that man before, and you'll be
        him again. And these men and women -- they call themselves Stormcloaks
        because they believe in you... They are the meanest, toughest sons of
        bitches Skyrim has to offer. And they want this. They want this as much
        as you do. Perhaps they want it more.

Ulfric You're certain we're ready? Whiterun's army will no doubt be bolstered
        by Legionnaires. And those walls around Whiterun are old, but they
        still stand.

Galmar We're ready. And I might be old myself, but I'll kick those damn walls
        down with my bare feet! -- if you would only ask me to do it!

Ulfric And I'm sure you could do it, too. Alright. This is it.

Galmar Yes!

Ulfric Send the word. A new day is dawning and the sun rises over Whiterun.

Galmar Aye, and the sons of Skyrim will greet that dawn teeth and swords
        flashing.

Ulfric So it begins. Make haste to our camp in Whiterun. I want you on the
        front lines. I have a feeling about you. Your place is on that
        battlefield. I need you there.

        Yes, sir!
        
         Fight well, or die well.

        Many will die by my hand.
        
         Then I commit them to whatever gods they still believe in.

        Talos be with you!

Galmar We're taking the city. Meet the brothers gathering for the attack.
        Fight well or die well. Talos be with you.

|

|

[The player travels to the Stormcloaks' catapult-filled camp in Whiterun's
 countryside.]

Galmar This is it, men!

Ralof So, do you get that weird taste in your mouth before battle, too? What
       is that?

[They storm the gates, destroying the chevaux-de-frise and approaching the
 main gate. However, the drawbridge is down, forcing the Dragonborn to flank
 the hill and open it manually. This sudden change causes the Whiterun and
 Imperials to garrison inside the town, forcing the battle all the way up to
 Dragonsreach.]

Irileth Halt in the name of the Jarl, Balgruuf the Greater!

Balgruuf I'll be damned if I let this rabble take my city without raising my
          own sword.

Irileth Stay back, lord!

[Soon, the jarl is brought to heel.]

Balgruuf Enough! That's enough. I surrender...I surrender. Peace! Everyone
          stand down. That's an order. Stand down!

[Hostilities over, a prominent Whiterun citizen enters the castle.]

Vignar Gray-Mane Balgruuf!

Balgruuf Vignar Gray-Mane! Your family was noticeably absent from the walls...
          Now I know why. Wouldn't a dagger in the back have sufficed?

Vignar You think this is personal? The Empire has no place in Skyrim... Not
        any more. And you? You have no place in Whiterun anymore.

Balgruuf A convenient position to hold now. But mark my words, old man, in
          the days to come, Ulfric will spread his rebellion thin. And what
          then? We need the Empire, as much as it needs us. We Nords are the
          Empire! Our blood built it. Our blood sustains it! You of all people
          should know that.

Vignar If this was my Empire, I'd be able to worship whoever I damned well
        pleased. You wish to see an Empire without Talos? Without its soul? We
        should be fighting those witch-elves, not bending knee to them. The
        Emperor is nothing more than a puppet of the Thalmor. Skyrim needs a
        High King who will fight for her, and Whiterun needs a Jarl who will
        do the same.

Balgruuf Tell me, Vignar. Was all this worth it? How many of those corpses
          lining our streets wear the faces of men who once called you friend?
          What about their families?

Galmar Enough! Both of you! There is a burning city out there that needs a
        government.

Vignar He's right. Galmar, come, let us restore order.

Balgruuf This isn't over. You hear me you old fool! This isn't over!

[He turns to the player.]

Balgruuf And you. A Stormcloak? I'd thought better of you. You'll all come to
          regret this day.

Galmar Get over to Windhelm. Tell Ulfric of our victory here.

Ralof I'm pretty sure I killed more than you. I was counting.

[The victory is soon reported to Ulfric.]

Ulfric We've driven the Imperials out of Whiterun. This is good. Very good.
        We now control the center. It's a powerful position. One I aim to keep.
        We'll call you Ice-Veins now, for the thick blood of our land has
        seeped into your heart. Here, take this. It's an Imperial officer's
        sword. A fitting weapon to use against our enemy.

Dragonborn What's our next move against the Empire?

Ulfric I suspect you'll be of greater use to us with greater freedom, so
        you're free to engage the Imperials as you see fit. But I also want you
        to find our hidden camp in Falkreath. Galmar will have special tasks
        for you, and will need you when we liberate the capital.

        What exactly will I be doing out there?
        
         You'll be doing whatever Galmar tells you to do, and causing as much
         mayhem as possible for the Empire and any Jarl who supports them.

        Understood.
        
         • Talos guide you.
         • Go with the gods.

|

|

[The player journeys to Falkreath's camp, set on the Throat of the World's
 southern slope, near the mountain pass.]

Dragonborn Reporting in.

Galmar You're going to Fort Neugrad. They have some of our boys locked up
        there. But with a little luck, we can turn that to our advantage. I've
        sent some men to scout the area. Meet them, see if you can't find a way
        to slip in, free our men, and take over the fort. They'll never suspect
        an attack from the inside. This won't be easy. But that's why I'm
        sending you. You got the grit to get this done?

        I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
        
         I see. Well, make it quick, or do you have better things to do than
         fight for the people of Skyrim?

        Nothing I can't handle.
        
         • We all have faith in you.
         • Good. You've got real fire in you. I like that... Talos guide you.

|

|

[Near the fort, the player finds the ambush party. Ralof is there, too.]

Ralof Well, well. Look who it is! How have you been?

       I'm all right, I guess. How are you?
       
        Good to hear.

       I've been better. And you?
       
        These are dark days. But at least we know we're doing our part to make
        things better, eh? I guess I'm doing all right.

       I need this to go well. This is my first real command since they
       promoted me after Whiterun. You know, some nights when I close my eyes,
       I see the battle stretched out before me, like I'm still there... Do the
       men you killed still haunt you? Mine do...

         Only a beast kills without feeling.
         
          I suppose you're right...they say it gets easier... I'm not sure if
          that's a good thing...

         If you hadn't killed them, they would have killed you.
         
          That's what I keep telling myself.

         But, never mind all that. We've got a job to do.

       So what's the plan? / What's the plan?
       
        Straight to business with you, huh? Well, it just so happens I have
        the perfect mission for you. We found a cave under the lake. With
        luck, it'll lead into the prison. I need you to sneak in there, free
        our men, killing anyone inside as you go. Once you've rescued the
        prisoners, head out to the courtyard. We'll stand guard out here and
        rush in as soon as we hear fighting. Should be fun.

       I'm on it.
       
        • You should wait until night fall¹ before trying to sneak in.

       Talos preserve you.

       I'm not much for sneaking.
       
        I have faith in you.

[Using Ralof's advice, the player uses a sunken cave to infiltrate the prison.
 The four prisoners are being watched by a guard, who's quickly disposed of.]

Stormcloak The guard has the key.

[The captives are freed. They collect their confiscated gear, then make for
 the courtyard. The pincer attack is successful, ensuring all Imperials are
 gutted and the fort overtaken.]

Ralof Great work! Get back and report our success. I'll stay here and clean
       up the mess. Glad you were here. Couldn't have done it without you!

[News is brought to Ulfric.]

Ulfric I'm proud we liberated Falkreath from the Empire. In many ways it's the
        heart and soul of Skyrim. Not to mention its rather strategic position.
        Some brothers have taken to calling you Bone-Breaker, evidence of your
        ferocity and determination. A fitting name. So we shall all call you
        thus. The war demands so much from us, and we give all we have to it
        and the people...but I've kept a little something to offer you in
        appreciation. Please take this on behalf of all the brothers and
        sisters. And I need capable and loyal warriors close at hand. So I'd
        like to offer you a home in Windhelm. Speak with my steward who'll make
        the arrangements.

Dragonborn What's our next move against the Empire?

Ulfric Get over to our camp in the Reach. They need every able body they can
        muster.

        What exactly will I be doing out there?
        
         You'll be doing whatever Galmar tells you to do, and causing as much
         mayhem as possible for the Empire and any Jarl who supports them.

        Understood.
        
         • Talos guide you.
         • For Skyrim!

|

|

[One ventures to the hilly Reach camp, northeast of Karthwasten.]

Dragonborn Reporting in.

Galmar Get over to Markarth. Rumor has it the Jarl's steward, Raerek, is a
        faithful Talos worshipper, if not a true son of Skyrim -- he still
        supports the Empire, after all. But, if confronted with proof of his
        belief, you might be able to persuade him to aid our cause,
        indirectly of course. Wouldn't want to sully his reputation, would we?
        You'll need to be careful with this one. The Jarl's men won't look
        kindly on you rummaging through the steward's quarters.

        I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
        
         I see. Well, make it quick, or do you have better things to do than
         fight for the people of Skyrim?

        I'll get proof...and Raerek's cooperation.
        
         I can always count on you, can't I?

[One ventures to Understone Keep in Markarth, and finds Raerek's inscribed
 Amulet of Talos in his nightstand. He's immediately confronted with it.]

Dragonborn Recognize this? (Show him Raerek's Inscribed Amulet of Talos)

Raerek Not here. Come with me. Stay close and the guards will leave you alone.

[He leads the player into his chambers.]

Raerek I suppose you're here to extort something from me? Is that it? Well,
        what is it you want?

        If you believe in Talos, why don't you join our cause?
        
         So. You're one of Ulfric's spies... I can't deny the man is right
         about a few things... But I've seen first hand what Ulfric is capable
         of, given the chance. Suffice it to say, he is no friend of Markarth,
         and no friend of mine. My first and only loyalties are to my nephew,
         and to this city.

        What if this were made public?
        
         The Thalmor would need to make an example of me...I'd be thrown into
         prison, but our family's honor would be stained for generations. I'm
         the Jarl's uncle. He, his father, and I, swore oaths to the Empire to
         abandon Talos, as conditions of our return to the city.

Dragonborn Perhaps we could come to some kind of agreement?

Raerek What if I told you about a large shipment of silver and weapons?

        Go on. I'm listening.
        
         Oh, no. I won't tell you anything more until we have an agreement.

         And what about something for me, right now? (Persuade)
         
          Well I...I suppose I'm not left much choice in the matter, am I? Very
          well. I trust a hefty purse of septims will suffice?

        How much are we talking about?
        
         Enough to make a significant difference in the war.

        All right, it's a deal. Where can I find this shipment?
        
         They're taking it by wagon to Solitude. If you hurry, you'll catch
         them before they get far. It'll be a fairly slow moving¹ caravan. The
         shipment is quite heavy, and guarded by many men.

        Now, let's pretend we never had this discussion.

[The news is delivered to one's superior.] 

Dragonborn Raerek says there's a shipment of coin traveling to Solitude...

Galmar Good job. I knew you'd come back with something for me. It just so
        happens, I've got some scouts along the road. Meet up with them, and
        together see if you can't overpower the caravan.

[Ralof is found once again at the meeting spot.]

Ralof Hey there! I was wondering when I'd run into you out here. The Reach is
       a beautiful but dangerous place, eh? One false step and you'll fall to
       your death, that is if those Forsworn don't get you first. Have you
       seen those Briarheart men? That's some evil magic right there. What
       brings you? You have the look of purpose in your eyes.

Dragonborn There's an enemy wagon loaded with coin and weapons. We need to
            capture it.

Ralof Really? It just so happens we've been tracking a wagon! For about a day
       now. So that's what's in there? Coins and weapons? How do you know
       that?

       I blackmailed Raerek for the information.
       
        That was crafty. I'm sure having a steward in the pocket will come in
        handy. Lucky for us, that the wagon recently had a little accident.
        They're stranded now. Just up the road! 

       It doesn't matter.
       
        Oh, fine. Keep your secrets. I see how it is. That wagon recently had
        a little accident. They're stranded now, just up the road.
        
       We're outnumbered, but I have a plan. You got here just in time.

Dragonborn What's the plan?

Ralof First, we're going to take out their sentry, then we'll situate
       ourselves overlooking the camp. Next, you'll infiltrate their position
       and get their attention while we hit them with a barrage of arrows. With
       a bit of luck, we'll catch them completely off guard and even the odds a
       little.

       I have a better plan. You wait here, and I'll take care of it.
       
        All right, if you insist. But we'll come running if it sounds like
        things have gotten out of hand.

       Let's wait a little longer.
       
        Let me know when you're ready.

       Ready. Let's go.
       
        Good.

[They sneak forward toward the sentry.]

Ralof There's a sentry patrolling the hill. We'll go in quiet and drop him
       with a combined arrow barrage. Keep low, fire on my word. Fire!

[They silently slay the watchman.]

Ralof All right. You infiltrate their camp, we'll cover you from the ridge.
       Good luck!

[The Imperial stooges are mopped up.]

Ralof We make quite a team, eh? I'll stay here and guard the shipment. You
       get back to camp with news. Have them send some men -- and a new wagon.
       This one isn't going anywhere.

[Galmar is notified.]

Galmar Well done! I'll send men with a wagon to collect our prize. We'll put
        the weapons to use here, and I'll send the coin back to Windhelm.

|

|

Dragonborn Reporting in.

Galmar You're going to Fort Sungard. Meet the brothers preparing for the
        attack. Then join them in wiping out the Imperials. Once you prevail
        we will garrison the fort. What do you say? Can you do this?

        I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
        
         I see. Well, make it quick, or do you have better things to do than
         fight for the people of Skyrim?

        That fort is as good as ours.
        
         Good. You've got real fire in you. I like that... Talos guide you.

[It's off to the fort, set atop a ridge and heavily fortified. Despite the
 odds, the troopers are massacred, establishing a foothold for the 'Cloaks.
 The player reports to Ulfric.]

Ulfric Now that the Empire has been driven from the Reach we can put a stop
        to the raping of her silver mines. That silver belongs to Skyrim.
        Multitudes of our enemies are buried in an avalanche of pain and
        retribution delivered by your hands. I shall call you Snow-Hammer
        now. You show great passion for battle, and compassion for those we
        fight for. You are becoming indispensable to our cause. We do what we
        do out of love for our brothers and sisters. Here, take this as a token
        of such love reciprocated.

Dragonborn What's next?

Ulfric You're needed in Hjaalmarch. There's much to be done.

        What exactly will I be doing out there?
        
         You'll be doing whatever Galmar tells you to do, and causing as much
         mayhem as possible for the Empire and any Jarl who supports them.

        Understood.
        
         • For Skyrim!
         • Talos guide you.

|

|

[One visits the Hjaalmarch camp, in the marshes near Solitude Inlet. Galmar,
 as usual, is there to dole out missions.]

Dragonborn Reporting for duty.

Galmar Need you to deliver some false orders to the Imperial Legate in
        Morthal. But first we need to get our hands on some Imperial orders to
        make the forgeries. The inns at Dragonbridge¹ and Rorikstead are
        frequent stops for Imperial runners. See if you can't convince one of
        those innkeepers to help you. One way or another, get me those
        documents. What do you say?

        I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
        
         I see. Well, make it quick, or do you have better things to do than
         fight for the people of Skyrim?

        That fort is as good as ours.
        
         • Don't screw this up.
         • Excellent. Put the fear of the Nine into those motherless dogs.

[If one goes to Dragon Bridge or Rorikstead, the innkeeper is Faida or Mralki,
 respectively. They have the same responses; in fact, these are also the same
 responses seen in the Imperials' version of the quest.]

Mralki I tend to keep my patrons' privacy.

        His life is in danger. (Persuade)
        
         • It is? Well that's different.
         • Yeah, sure it is. You don't fool me.

        
         • Well, if you insist...
         • Seems your purse is lighter than you thought.

        I don't have time for this. I can get rough with you if I have to.
        (Intimidate) |
        
         Now, now! That won't be necessary.

        Never mind.
        
         Hmph.

        He was here, but he left. If you leave now, you can probably catch
        him. Or, you can just wait here. He'll be back soon enough.

[Eventually, one tracks down the Imperial deliveryman.]

Courier Can't stop to chat, citizen.

         I'm not here to talk. I'm here for those documents.
         
          Is that so?

         Never mind.
         
          Hmph.

[The parcel is taken, one way or another, to Galmar.]

Galmar Good work! Let's see what you got. Hmm... They know more of our plans
        than I thought... Not good... Oh, what's this? Fort Snowhawk is in need
        of reinforcements... We'll make sure they won't be getting those...
        Give me a moment while I make a few, um, corrections to these
        reports... There we go. Make sure those forged documents get to the
        Legate in Morthal. That should give them the wrong idea...and us the
        advantage.

[One seeks out Taurinus Duilis in the swampy village.]

Dragonborn I have important documents for you, sir.

Duilis • Is that so? Lost your uniform along the way did you, soldier?

          Dragonborn Ditched it for this. Easier to sneak past the enemy.

          I suppose it would be. Good thinking.

        Thank you, soldier. Let's take a look at these reports... I'm waiting
        on word about reinforcements for the fort... Good, they're on the way.
        And we have some information on enemy troop movements. Excellent.
        Stormcloak scouts are making it difficult to move around. It's good
        you made it here in one piece. Why don't you have yourself a drink at
        the Moorside before you head back?

|

|

[Galmar is notified of the subterfuge.]

Galmar Good job! Ulfric was right about you. I'm glad to have you with us!

Dragonborn Reporting in.

Galmar You're going to Fort Snowhawk. Meet the brothers preparing for the
        attack. Then join them in wiping out the Imperials. Once you prevail
        we will garrison the fort. What do you say? Can you do this?

        I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
        
         I see. Well, make it quick, or do you have better things to do than
         fight for the people of Skyrim?

        That fort is as good as ours.
        
         Good. You've got real fire in you. I like that... Talos guide you.

|

|

[One visits Snowhawk, set in the mountain west of Morthal. It's a wonder who
 got the wrong report there's still many men garrisoned, making man to cut
 through before victory's at hand. Afterward, it's time to notify Ulfric.]

Ulfric Tullius must be getting nervous. Taking Hjaalmarch we're practically
        in his backyard now. As soon as we're able, we'll march on Solitude.
        You've become a true hero of Skyrim. I number you among my kin. You
        shall now be known as Stormblade. The love of the land and her people
        flows from your heart, even as death to her enemies flows from your
        hands. On behalf of the sons and daughters of Skyrim, on behalf of all
        that is righteous and true, take this token of our appreciation for
        your service.

Dragonborn What's next?

Ulfric You've no time to glory in your accomplishments. We're gathering for
        our final assault on Solitude. I need you there. Report to our camp in
        Haafingar.

|

|

[One goes to the base, situated between Solitude and Dragon Bridge.]

Dragonborn Reporting in.

Galmar You're going to the fort. Meet the brothers preparing for the attack.
        Then join them in wiping out the Imperials. Once you prevail we will
        garrison the fort. What do you say? Can you do this?

        I'm not sure. I need to think about it.
        
         I see. Well, make it quick, or do you have better things to do than
         fight for the people of Skyrim?

        That fort is as good as ours.
        
         Good. You've got real fire in you. I like that... Talos guide you.

[One visits the snowy fort, nestled on the northern face of the mountains
 near Solitude, overlooking the sea. After the hard-fought victory, it's back
 to Galmar.]

Galmar Good job! Ulfric was right about you. I'm glad to have you with us!

Dragonborn How can I help?

Galmar We're taking the city. Meet the brothers gathering for the attack.
        Fight well or die well. Talos be with you.

|

|

[At long last, it's time to fight at the seat of Tullius' leadership. Ulfric
 himself is leading the charge at the city's gates.]

Ulfric This is it men! Time to make this city ours! We come to this moment
        carried by the sacrifice and courage of our fellows! Those who have
        fallen. And those still bearing shields to our right. On this day, our
        enemy will know the fullness of our determination, the true depth of
        our anger, and the exalted righteousness of our cause. The gods are
        watching. The spirits of our ancestors are stirring. And men under suns
        yet to dawn will be transformed by what we do here today. Fear neither
        pain, nor darkness. For Sovngarde awaits those who die with weapons in
        their hands, and courage in their hearts. We now fight our way to
        Castle Dour to cut the head off the Legion itself! And in that moment,
        the gods will look down and see Skyrim as she was meant to be. Full of
        Nords who are mighty, powerful, and free! Ready now! Everyone, with me!
        For the sons and daughters of Skyrim! Rrrrrraaaaaaaaaggggghhhhhhh!!!!!!

[The Stormcloak army filters into the city, bringing the bloodletting to the
 streets in quick fashion. The shortest route is now gated, forcing the battle
 up and around into the courtyard. Eventually, the castle is infiltrated, with
 the jarl and Galmar in tow. Rikke and Tullius are in the strategy room.]
 
Ulfric Secure the door.

Galmar Already done.

[The player can speak to Rikke before anything else happens.]

Rikke Dragonborn... Perhaps this is the fate of Skyrim after all. To be
       destroyed from the inside.

       We'll kill you if we must.
       
        A true Nord never fears death. It's the how and why of it one needs
        consider.

       Rikke, leave. They'll kill you.
       
        If that must be, then it will. And why should I be any different? So
        many lives have already been lost. What's one more?

[The Jarl will soon approach Tullius and his aide-de-camp.]

Rikke Ulfric. Stop.

Ulfric Stop what? Taking Skyrim back from those who'd leave her to rot?

Rikke You're wrong. Ulfric. We need the Empire. Without it Skyrim will
       assuredly fall to the Dominion.

Galmar You were there with us. You saw it. The day the Empire signed that
        damn treaty was the day the Empire died.

Rikke You're a damn fool.

Galmar Stand aside woman. We've come for the General.

Rikke He has given up. But I have not.

Ulfric Rikke. Go. You're free to leave.

Rikke I'm also free to stay and fight for what I believe in.

Ulfric You're also free to die for it.

Rikke This is what you wanted? Shield brothers and sisters killing each other?
       Families torn apart? This is the Skyrim you want?!

Galmar Damnit woman, stand aside!

Rikke That's not the Skyrim I want to live in.

Ulfric Rikke. You don't have to do this.

Rikke You've left me no choice... Talos preserve us.

[The fighting is brief, but ends with Rikke dead and Tullius gravely wounded.]

Tullius Enough...enough...

Ulfric This is it for you. Any last words before I send you to Oblivion?

Tullius You realize this is exactly what they wanted.

Galmar What who wanted?

Tullius The Thalmor. They stirred up trouble here. Forced us to divert needed
         resources and throw away good soldiers quelling this rebellion.

Ulfric It's a little more than a rebellion, don't you think?

Galmar Heh.

Tullius We aren't the bad guys you know.

Ulfric Maybe not, but you certainly aren't the good guys.

Tullius Perhaps you're right. But then what does that make you?

Ulfric You said it yourself.

Galmar It makes us right.

Tullius And if I surrender?

Ulfric The Empire I remember never surrendered.

Galmar That Empire is dead. And so are you.

Tullius So be it.

Galmar Just kill him and let's be done with it already.

Ulfric Come, Galmar. Where's your sense of the dramatic moment?

Galmar By the gods! If it's a good ending to some damn story you're after --
        perhaps the Dragonborn should be the one to do it.

Ulfric Good point. Well, Dragonborn. What do you say? Do you want the honor?

        I've had my fair share of killing today.
        
         As you wish.

        That honor belongs to you.
        
         As you wish. This moment, we three, will be immortalized in song.

        I'll gladly kill him.
        
         Dragonborn. Here, use my sword to do it. This moment will be
         immortalized in song. Make it a good kill.
         
[One way or another, Tullius is put to the sword.]

Tullius Aghh..¹

Galmar Good. It's done.

Ulfric Well, I suppose some kind of speech is in order.

Galmar I'll go gather the men in the courtyard.

Ulfric And Elisif?

Galmar Don't you worry about her. I've sent my best men to round her up.

Ulfric Stormblade. I want you to have my sword, a token of my appreciation.
        Now then. The men will expect a speech. Will you stand by my side? I
        wish to honor you, Dragonborn and the truest of Stormcloaks.

        Of course, my Lord.
        
         Very good. Come, the people await us.

        Maybe you should leave me out of your speech.
        
         Oh, why is that?

         Many have fought and died. I'm no different than they are.
         
          On the contrary, you exceed the rest. But, I will honor your request.
          The gods will know of your victories, and they themselves will glory
          in your deeds. Come, at the very least walk out with me.

         I'm not sure this was all worth it, after all.
         
          There's no shame in such thoughts. A man without doubts is a man
          without a conscience. But rest assured. We've won Skyrim's right to
          determine her own future. And for that, every Nord praises us. But
          I will heed your wishes. Come, at the very least, walk out with me.

         My reasons are my own.
         
          A man's heart is his own burden to bear, so I will honor your
          request, though it casts a bit of gloom on an otherwise glorious
          day. Come, at the very least walk out with me.

[Outside, the Stormcloak throngs are massing for the speech. Elisif the Fair,
 the region's jarl, is in attendance with Galmar's bodyguards.]

Ulfric I am indeed Ulfric Stormcloak, and at my side the man we know as
        Stormblade, and the world knows as the Dragonborn. And indeed, there
        are many that call us heroes.

Ulfric • I am indeed Ulfric Stormcloak... And indeed, there are many that call
          me hero.

        • I am indeed Ulfric Stormcloak, and at my side the man we know as
          Stormblade, and the world knows as the Dragonborn. And indeed, there
          are many that call us heroes.

        But it is all of you who are the true heroes! It was you who fought a
        dying Empire who sunk its claws into our land, trying to drag us down
        with it. It was you who fought the Thalmor and their puppets who would
        have us deny our gods and our heritage. It was you who fought your kin
        who didn't understand our cause, who weren't willing to pay the price
        of our freedom. But more than that, it was you who fought for Skyrim,
        for our right to fight our own battles... To return to our glory and
        our traditions, to determine our own future! And it is for these
        reasons that I cannot accept the mantle of High King. Not until the
        Moot declares that title should adorn my shoulders will I accept it.

Stormcloak What about Jarl Elisif?

Ulfric Yes, what about the Lady Elisif? Will she put aside her personal hatred
        for me, and her misplaced love for the Emperor and his coin, so that
        the suffering of our people will end? Will she acknowledge that it is
        we Nord's¹ who will determine Skyrim's future? Will she swear fealty to
        me, so all may know we are at peace, and a new day has dawned?

Elisif I do!

Ulfric Then it is settled. The Jarl will continue to rule in Solitude, I will
        garrison armies here to ward off Imperial attempts to reclaim the city.
        And in due time, the Moot will meet, and settle the claim to High King
        once and for all. There is much to do, and I need every able bodied¹
        man and woman committed to rebuilding Skyrim. A great darkness is
        growing, and soon we will be called to fight it, on these shores or
        abroad. The Aldmeri Dominion may have defeated the Empire, but it has
        not defeated Skyrim!

Stormcloaks Yyyyyyyaaaaaahhhhhh!

Ulfric How'd I do?

Galmar Eh, not so bad. Nice touch about the High King.

Ulfric Thank you, I thought so, too.

Galmar It's a foregone conclusion, you know.

Ulfric Oh, I know.

Galmar The Imperials aren't going to leave us alone. They still have camps in
        the hills. They'll continue to strike out at us, whenever and wherever
        they are.

Ulfric I'm not afraid of the remnants of the Legion, in time they'll all give
        up and go home. What I fear, is the Thalmor will see our victory here
        and turn greater attention to our shores. We must be prepared to face
        them.

Galmar Aye.

[He turns to the player.]

Ulfric And, of course, we couldn't have done it without you. May the gods
        preserve you.

Galmar May the gods preserve us all.

Ulfric Come, Galmar. We've still much work to do.

[Ulfric can be asked about the future, now that the questline's over.]

Dragonborn Is there anything further I can do to help the cause?

Ulfric True sons and daughters of Skyrim reign in every city, we've crippled
        the Imperial Legion, and cut off its head by killing General Tullius
        himself. What more could I ask of you? No, you're free to roam. I
        suspect the gods have needs for you elsewhere. That said, some of the
        Legion's staunchest men have organized themselves, and are operating
        out of hidden military camps in the wilderness. If you come across any
        Imperials in your travels, I expect you'll know what to do.

Dragonborn So, do I call you High King now?

Ulfric No, not yet. We'll wait for the Moot to name me High King. It'll be
        better for all that way. But, that doesn't mean I won't start acting
        like it. There's much to do. The new Jarls need help building armies,
        and enforcing their right to rule. The Empire may try to reclaim
        Skyrim, and I need everyone ready for that. Though the biggest threat,
        of course, is the elves.

Dragonborn Now that we've defeated the Imperials, will there be peace?

Ulfric There will be peace for a time, during which we must rebuild Skyrim
        into the land it once was. Strong. Self-reliant. The center of mankind.
        Because getting rid of the Empire was only half the problem. Soon, the
        elves will again seek to rule the world. We must ready ourselves to
        fight them. For it will be Skyrim that shall lead Tamriel in those
        dark days, when the fate of the world is finally determined.

[Galmar can also be spoken to.]

Dragonborn Is there anything further I can do for the cause?

Galmar No. I trust you'll do more good out there in the world, wherever you
        damn well please to go. You're a true son of Skyrim. You'll know what
        to do. To begin with, killing any Legionnaire you find out in the
        wilderness. I've reports they've hidden military camps out there.

Dragonborn What's next for the mighty Galmar Stone-Fist?

Galmar Heh. Ulfric's put me in charge of keeping an eye on the new Jarls. You
        know, make sure they're generally following orders. Can't say I'm
        looking forward to that. But, I'll also be training men and women for
        their new armies. The Empire might send over a few Legionnaires to make
        sure we're serious, and of course, we'll be taking the fight to the
        elves soon enough. We'll need trained, disciplined and creative
        warriors ready for all that.

[Elisif can be spoken to as well.]

Dragonborn What do you think about Ulfric, now that he has won?

Elisif Ulfric coveted the High King's throne. He thought he deserved it more
        than Torygg. Now it would seem Ulfric has his wish. And there truly is
        no justice in the world.

Dragonborn So, do you still claim to be High Queen of Skyrim?

Elisif No. Although it's true my husband Torygg was the High King and I am his
        widow, I am in no position to claim such a title. Ulfric Stormcloak is
        victorious, and the Jarls have fallen in line. It seems I will never
        take my rightful place as High Queen.

|

|

 [While walking in Riften, a man approaches in the marketplace. It's the same
 bunko artist trying to hawk genuine Falmerblood elixirs to unsuspecting
 travelers.]

Brynjolf Never done an honest day's work in your life for all that coin you're
          carrying, eh, lad?

Dragonborn I'm sorry, what?

Brynjolf I'm saying you've got the coin, but you didn't earn a septim of it
          honestly. I can tell.

          How could you possibly know that?
          
           It's all about sizing up your mark, lad. The way they walk, what
           they're wearing. It's a dead giveaway.7

          My wealth is none of your business.
          
           Oh, but that's where you're wrong, lad. Wealth is my business. Maybe
           you'd like a taste?

Dragonborn What do you have in mind?

Brynjolf I've got a bit of an errand to perform, but I need an extra pair of
          hands. And in my line of work, extra hands are well-paid.

Dragonborn What do I have to do?

Brynjolf Simple...I'm going to cause a distraction, and you're going to steal
          Madesi's silver ring from a strongbox under his stand. Once you
          have it, I want you to place it in Brand-Shei's pocket without him
          noticing.

          Why plant the ring on Brand-Shei?
          
           There's someone that wants to see him put out of business
           permanently. That's all you need to know. Now, you tell me when
           you're ready and we'll get started.

            I'm ready. Let's get this started.
            
             Good. Wait until I start the distraction, then show me what you're
             made of.

            Why are we doing this to Brand-Shei?
            
             We've been contracted to make Brand-Shei remembers not to meddle
             in affairs that are not his own. Now, since we're not the Dark
             Brotherhood, we're not going to kill him; we're just going to
             make sure he sits in the prisons for a few days.

            How am I supposed to do all of this?
            
             Do you want me to hold your hand as well? You're going to have to
             sneak over to Madesi's stall and use your lockpick on the
             strongbox. Then, when you have the ring, you pickpocket Brand-Shei
             and leave it behind.

          Break the law? Are you kidding?
          
           Sorry...I usually have a nose for this kind of thing. Never mind
           then, lad. If you change your mind, come find me.

[With help recruited, Brynjolf begins his scam, getting other vendors to come
 see what he's hawking.]

Brynjolf Everyone! Everyone! Gather 'round! I have something amazing to show
          you that demands your attention! This way, everyone! Over here! No
          pushing, no shoving. Plenty of room!

Brand-Shei Come on, Brynjolf...what is it this time?

Brynjolf Patience, Brand-Shei. This is a rare opportunity, and I wouldn't want
          you to get left out.

Madesi That's what you said about the Wisp Essence and it turned out to be
        crushed Nirnroot mixed with water!

Brynjolf Well, that was a simple misunderstanding, but this item is the real
          thing. Lads and lasses, I give you, Falmerblood Elixir!

Brand-Shei Oh, come on, are you talking about the Snow Elves?

Brynjolf The one and only. Mystical beings who live in legends and were
          masters of great magic. Imagine the power that coursed through their
          veins!

Madesi How did you get that then? No one's seen them in years!

Brynjolf My sources must remain a secret for their own protection, but I can
          promise you that the contents are genuine. One sip of the elixir and
          your wishes will be granted. Great wealth, everlasting life or
          perhaps limitless power could be yours!

Brand-Shei How much does it cost?

Brynjolf Only twenty gold septims. Hurry before my supply is gone!

Madesi Why would you even listen to him?

Brynjolf Only twenty septims a bottle!

Brand-Shei I can't afford to get one, but can I afford not to?

[The player steals Madesi's ring and reverse-pickpockets it without a hitch.]

Brynjolf Well, I see that my time is up. Come back tomorrow if you wish to
          buy.

Madesi What a waste of time.

Brand-Shei Damn. I knew I shouldn't have waited.

[As the crowd disperses, Brynjolf seeks the player out.]

Brynjolf Looks like I chose the right person for the job. And here you go...
          your payment, as promised. The way things have been going around
          here, it's a relief that our plan went off without a hitch.

Dragonborn What's been going on?

Brynjolf Bah. My organization's been having a run of bad luck, but I suppose
          that's just how it goes. But never mind that, you did the job and you
          did it well. Best of all, there's more where that came from...if you
          think you can handle it.

          I can handle it.
          
           Alright, then. Let's put that to the test. The group I represent has
           its home in the Ratway beneath Riften...a tavern called the Ragged
           Flagon. Get there in one piece and we'll see if you really have what
           it takes.

          The money's nice, but I don't know.
          
           Look, I'll make this simple for you. The group I represent has its
           home in the Ratway beneath Riften...a tavern called the Ragged
           Flagon. When you make up your mind, come find me there and we can
           talk about your future.

          No way. It was wrong to do those things.
          
           Arrogant, eh? Play it however you want, but listen up. The group I
           represent has its home in the Ratway beneath Riften...a tavern
           called the Ragged Flagon. When you come to your senses, find me
           there and we'll discuss your future.

|

|

[Defeating the foes in the Ratway, the player reaches the hidden tavern 'neath
 the city. Brynjolf and some of his cohorts are discussing the player.]

Vekel the Man Give it up, Brynjolf...those days are over.

Brynjolf I'm telling you, this one is different...

Dirge We've all hear that one before, Bryn! Quit kidding yourself.

Vekel the Man It's time to face the truth, old friend. You, Vex, Mercer...
               you're all part of a dying breed. Things are changing!

Brynjolf Dying breed, eh? Well what do you call that then?

Brynjolf Well, well...color me impressed, lad. I wasn't sure I'd ever see you
          again!

          Getting here was easy.
          
           Reliable and headstrong? You're turning out to be quite the prize!
           So...now that I've whetted your appetite with our little scheme at
           the market, how about handling a few deadbeats for me?

          I almost got killed!
          
           No risk, no reward. That's the way it goes, so you better get used
           to it. Now, if you're done bellyaching like a child, how about
           handling a few deadbeats for me?

          Don't know why I bothered. This place is a mess.
          
           If you were expecting a palace, then maybe you're not cut out for
           this line of work. Our methods require secrecy and discretion. Now,
           if you're done bellyaching like a child, how about handling a few
           deadbeats for me?

Dragonborn Deadbeats? What'd they do?

Brynjolf They owe our organization some serious coin and they've decided not
          to pay. I want you to explain to them the error of their ways.

Dragonborn Sounds good. Who are they?

Brynjolf Keerava, Bersi Honey-Hand and Haelga. Do this right and I can promise
          you a permanent place in our organization.

Dragonborn How do you want me to handle it?

Brynjolf Honestly, the debt is secondary here. What's more important is you
          get the message across that we aren't to be ignored. A word of
          warning, though...I don't want any of them killed. Bad for business.

          Consider it done.
          
           Good. If you need any details on your marks, I'll be here. Get

          Will I get a cut?
          
           Of course you'll get a cut. We take care of our own. Now, if you
           need any details on your marks, I'll be here. Get going.

          What's Haelga's story?
          
           Haelga is a devout follower of Dibella and dotes over the statue
           to the Divine which she keeps at the Bunkhouse. Use it as leverage
           and she'll cave.

          Any tips about Keerava?
          
           Keerava's stubborn, but she's got a soft spot for her family. Talk
           to Talen-Jei at the Bee and Barb and see if you can get something
           out of him. They're...well-acquainted, if you catch my meaning.

          Any help with Bersi?
          
           He's as pig-headed a man as you'll ever find. The key is that ugly
           dwarven urn in his shop. Smash that thing to bits and he'll change
           his attitude.

[The player goes to see Bersi Honey-Hand at his pawn shop.]

Dragonborn I have a message from Brynjolf.

Bersi Wha...what? Oh, it's one of you people. So, Brynjolf doesn't even bother
       to show up himself anymore, eh? What's this message?

       Simple. You don't pay, bad things happen.
       
        Petty threats and fist-waving are not going to sway me. You people are
        all talk and everyone knows it!

        We can protect ourselves. Trust me.
        
         Don't fool yourself. It's only a matter of time before you people are
         run out of Riften.

       I think you know what it is.
       
        You're gouging me for what little coin I make and you can't even
        protect yourselves? Ridiculous!

        We can protect ourselves. Trust me.
        
         (same as above)

       I've had enough of this.
       
        Likewise. Now, I have a lot to do, so I'm afraid you'll just have to
        leave!

       I think you need to shut your mouth. (Brawl)
       
        I'm going to make you sorry for this!

[If Bersi is beaten up]

Bersi Please, no more! I'll pay, I'll pay! Here.

[If the urn is destroyed.]

Bersi Stop! That's priceless!

Drifa Oh my word!

Bersi No! That urn was priceless!

Dragonborn You want me to break anything else?

Bersi All right! I get it. I'll pay on time from now on. Just don't smash
       anything else. Here! Take your gold and leave me in peace.

[If the urn is destroyed before speaking to Bersi]

Bersi I can't believe you're doing this! Stop! No! That urn was priceless!

Dragonborn That was from Brynjolf. Get the message?

Bersi I can't believe you did that! You people are monsters! You demand
       payment for protection and you can't even protect yourselves! Here, take
       your coin and tell Brynjolf to leave us alone.

[If Bersi is the last of the three left, he'll already be intimidated]

Bersi Oh no! You're the one from Brynjolf's outfit, aren't you?

Dragonborn I have a message from Brynjolf.

Bersi Oh! There's no need for that. I know why you're here. Tell Brynjolf not
       to worry about it anymore. Oh! And look, I even have the payment I owed.
       Here, take it.

[The player goes to Haelga's bunkhouse.]

Dragonborn I have a message for Brynjolf.

Haelga What does he want now? I already explained to him that you can't get
        blood from a stone.

        This isn't about the money anymore.
        
         Look, I can't make the coin appear out of thin air. Please, be
         reasonable. I'll...I'll pay next month.

         We've run out of patience.
         
          And so have I. What's the point of paying anyway? Your outfit can't
          even fend for itself. I could do better tossing the gold into the
          sewer. You can't scare me with your tough talk. I'm not paying you a
          single coin.

        Then you'll pay in more than just coin. (Brawl)
        
         Ha! We'll see about that.

[If Haelga is beaten up]

Haelga Here...take your damn coin and get out of here!

[If her Dibella statue is taken.]

Haelga Please! Don't take the statue! It's the only thing of value I have
        left!

        I have a message from Brynjolf.
        
         You...you have my statue! What are you going to do with it?

        So, should I drop this statue down a well?
        
         Not Lady Dibella! No, please! I can't lose her! I get the message.
         Here, take your gold. I hope you choke on it!

[If Haelga is the last of the three, she'll already be intimidated.]

Haelga It's you! Please, don't hurt me!

Dragonborn I have a message from Brynjolf.

Haelga I know who you are. You've been terrorizing the entire city. Please,
        there's no need for that here. Message understood. Here, I even have
        the payment!

[The player goes to shakedown Keerava, an Argonian at the bar.]

Dragonborn I have a message from Brynjolf.

Keerava I've already told that buffoon I'm not paying you people a single
         coin!

Dragonborn It was never a request.

Keerava Look around you, I'm barely keeping this rathole together. The war's
         seen to that.

         I'm finished wasting my time talking to you.
         
          Good, and take this little message back to your bosses I'm not
          paying any of you a single septim...ever! Now get out of my inn!

         Don't say I didn't warn you.
         
          Come on, give it your best shot!

[If Keerava is beaten up]

Keerava Please, stop! I'll pay up! Take it.

[If one learns about Keerava's family from Talen-Jei, another Argonian]

Dragonborn Are you ready to pay Brynjolf what you owe?

Keerava No, and I never will. Now get out of my inn.

Dragonborn Maybe I should visit that farm in Morrowind...

Keerava How could you possibly know about... Please. My family means too much
         to me. Don't hurt them.

Dragonborn Then pay up and I'll forget about it.

Keerava Very well. Here. Take this back to Brynjolf and tell him he'll have
         no more trouble from me.

[If Keerava is the last of the three, she'll already be intimidated.]

Dragonborn I have a message from Brynjolf.

Keerava Look, everything was all just a misunderstanding. I didn't mean to
         tell Brynjolf to go jump off the pier. You'll tell him I'm sorry, yes?
         Take this. Every single coin I owe is there, I swear.

[With all three merchants shaken down, the player returns to Ragged Flagon.]

Brynjolf So, job's done and you even brought the gold. Best of all, you did it
          clean. I like that. Dumping bodies and keeping the guards quiet can
          be expensive.

Dragonborn Here's what they owed us.

Brynjolf Well done. And it would seem I owe you something in return. Here you
          go, I think you'll find these quite useful.

[He gives some potions as recompense.]

Dragonborn What's next, then?

Brynjolf Judging from how well you've handled those shopkeepers, I'd say
          you've done more than simply prove yourself. We need people like you
          in our outfit.

Dragonborn If there's more gold where that came from, I'm in.

Brynjolf That's the spirit! Larceny's in your blood...the telltale sign of a
          practiced thief. I think you'll do more than just fit in around here.

Dragonborn Before we go, I have to ask...

Brynjolf What's on your mind?

Dragonborn Word is your outfit isn't doing well. True?

Brynjolf We've run into a rough patch lately, but it's nothing to be concerned
          about. Tell you what you keep making us coin and I'll worry about
          everything else. Fair enough?

Dragonborn Fair enough.

Brynjolf Now if there are no more questions, how about following me and I'll
          show you what you're all about.

|

|

[Brynjolf leads the player through a hidden door into the Thieves Guild's real
 domain, a cistern beyond the Ragged Flagon. The guildmaster is waiting.]

Brynjolf Mercer? This is the one I was talking about...our new recruit.

Mercer Frey This better not be another waste of the Guild's resources,
             Brynjolf. Before we continue, I want to make one thing perfectly
             clear. If you play by the rules, you walk away rich. You break
             the rules and you lose your share. No debates, no discussions...
             you do what we say, when we say. Do I make myself clear?

             Yes, I understand.
             
              Good. Then I think it's time we put your expertise to the test.

             I'm not sure.
             
              If you're not sure maybe you don't belong here. I'll ask again,
              are we clear on all of this?

             Rules? We're thieves. What's the point of rules?
             
              I'll let that comment go because you're new here. Ask things out
              of turn again, and we have a problem. Now, are we clear on all
              of this?

Brynjolf Wait a moment... You're not talking about Goldenglow, are you? Even
          our little Vex couldn't get in.

Mercer You claim this recruit possesses an aptitude for our line of work. If
        so, let him prove it. Goldenglow Estate is critically important to one
        of our largest clients. However, the owner has suddenly decided to take
        matters into his own hands, and shut us out. He needs to be taught a
        lesson. Brynjolf will provide you with the details.

Brynjolf Mercer, aren't you forgetting something?

Mercer Hmm? Oh, yes... Since Brynjolf assures me you'll be nothing but a
        benefit to us, then you're in. Welcome to the Thieves Guild.

[Mercer walks off.]

Brynjolf Welcome to the family, lad. I'm expecting you to make us a lot of
          coin, so don't disappoint me.

Dragonborn So how do I get my cut of the spoils?

Brynjolf Simple. Do as you're told and keep your blade clean. We can't turn a
          profit by killing. You should talk with Delvin Mallory and Vex. They
          know their way around this place and they'll be able to kick some
          extra jobs your way. Oh, and talk to Tonilia in the Flagon...she'll
          set you up with your new armor.

Dragonborn Tell me about the Goldenglow job.

Brynjolf Goldenglow Estate is a bee farm; they raise the wretched little
          things for honey. It's run by some smart-mouth wood elf named
          Aringoth. We need you to teach him a lesson by burning down three of
          his estate's hives

Dragonborn What's the catch?

Brynjolf The catch is that you can't burn the whole place to the ground. That
          important client Mercer mentioned would be furious if you did.

          Who cares, we're the Thieves Guild.
          
           That's not how things work around here. The Guild depends on an
           arrangement of influential people to keep things running smoothly.
           Without them at our backs, we'd be in serious trouble.

          Makes sense.
          
           Aye, the last thing we want to be doing is crossing our clients.
           
          What's so important about these clients?
          
           The guild depends on an arrangement of influential people to keep
           things running smoothly. Without them at our backs, we'd be in
           serious trouble.

Dragonborn What should I do about Aringoth?

Brynjolf Maven prefers that Aringoth remains alive, but if he tries to stop
          you from getting the job done, kill him. The Guild has a lot riding
          on this. Don't make me look foolish by mucking it up.

          I need more details about Goldenglow.
          
           Goldenglow Estate brought in a mountain of gold for the Guild. You
           could almost call it our sweetest deal. Then out of the clear blue,
           Aringoth stops sending us our cut. Mercer was...well, angry, to put
           it kindly. So we send in Vex to find out he's hired a bunch of
           mercenaries to guard the place.

            Mercenaries? Not Riften guards?
            
             Aye. Aringoth sent the city guard packing and fortified the entire
             island. In fact, Vex barely made it out of there alive. You should
             talk to her about it before you go.

          How do I destroy the bee hives?
          
           They're built like small fortresses to resist the weather, but their
           one weakness is flame. Besides, nothing tells the people of Riften
           we mean business than a huge column of smoke.

            Why not level the entire estate?
            
            I'll give you one good reason Maven Black-Briar. Burn all the
            hives and she'd have to import for Black-Briar Meadery, which would
            cut into her profits.

             Maven Black-Briar is the influential client?
             
              We had an arrangement with Maven. We kept an eye on Goldenglow
              Estate to make sure the honey kept flowing. If the workers had a
              dispute, we rough them up. If competitors tried to buy honey from
              Aringoth, we'd steal the shipments. In return, Maven allowed us
              to extort Aringoth and bring in a huge payout.

               So, how dangerous is it to cross her?
               
                Let me put it to you this way nothing happens in Riften
                without Maven's consent. One word from her and you could spend
                the rest of the fourth era in prison.

[The player prepares to leave.]

Brynjolf You watch yourself on that island. Those mercenaries don't take
          prisoners.

[Optionally, one can ask Vex about her encounter.]

Dragonborn I heard you ran into trouble at Goldenglow.

Vex Hmph, yeah, I did. That wood elf s'wit...he's a lot smarter than I
     expected. Can you believe that fetcher had more than tripled the guard?
     There must have been eight of them in there. It was like he was daring us
     to come and get him.

Dragonborn Any tips to get me in there?

Vex Well, there's an old sewer tunnel that dumps into the lake on the
     northwest side of the island. That's how I slipped in there. Should still
     be unguarded.

[If the player finds Aringoth upstairs]

Aringoth Worthless mercenaries. I didn't think Maven or Mercer would allow
          me to get away with this, but I had little choice.

Dragonborn I just want the key to your safe.

Aringoth I can't. If I do, I may as well cut my own throat.

          What makes you think I won't? (Persuade)
          
           I don't believe you. That's not your way.

          Then I'll take it off your corpse!
          
           Give it your best shot!

          Forget it. I'll just open it myself.
          
           No! I'm not about to let you ruin everything I've worked so hard
           for!

[If the player returns to Brynjolf after destroying too many hives]

Brynjolf You've made a mess and Maven is furious. I told you not to burn more
          than three of the hives! I've smoothed things over with her for now,
          but you can forget your cut.

Dragonborn Sorry. Here's what was in the safe.

Brynjolf At least you remembered one of the things I asked. Let me see that.

[If the player returns to Brynjolf after doing a satisfactory job]

Brynjolf Word on the street is Goldenglow's been hit. Good job.

Dragonborn Yes, and here's what was in the safe.

Brynjolf Let me take a look at what you found. Aringoth sold Goldenglow?
          What's that idiot thinking? He has no idea the extent of Maven's fury
          when she's been cut out of a deal, but I'm certain he'll find out. If
          only the parchment had the buyer's name instead of this odd symbol.
          Any idea what that may be?

Dragonborn No idea.

Brynjolf Blast. Well, I'll check my sources and ask Mercer. But for now,
          you're off to speak with Maven Black-Briar. She asked for you by
          name.

          Good, it's about time I met her.
          
           Don't sound so eager, it's not a social visit. It's business.

          I thought I did the job like you asked...?
          
           Oh, no. Nothing like that. You're calling on her for business.

          Sure, but will I come out of there alive?
          
           Ha ha. If it was like that she wouldn't be asking for you, she'd
           be calling the Dark Brotherhood. It's just business.

Dragonborn What does Maven want from me?

Brynjolf That's between you and Maven and I prefer to keep it that way.

          • Just keep your ears open and your mouth shut and you'll do fine.
          • Don't worry about it. Maven's business dealings usually involve
            quite a bit of gold for her people.

Dragonborn Speaking of which...

Brynjolf Of course...your pay. Haha! You're smart as a whip, lad. Keep doing
          right by us and there'll be plenty more where that came from.

|

|

[Dragonborn tracks down Maven in Riften. If the player fouled things up]

Maven Black-Briar So you're the one who burned down Goldenglow Estate. Do you
                   have any idea what that little stunt you pulled is going to
                   cost me? I'm amazed you even bothered to show your face
                   here.

Dragonborn My apologies, Lady Maven.

Maven The only reason we're having this conversation is due to Brynjolf's
       assurance you won't botch another assignment. He claims you possess some
       sort of uncanny aptitude for your line of work. Quite frankly I find
       that hard to believe.

[If the player did the Goldenglow job right]

Maven So, you're the one. Hmm. You don't look so impressive.

       I'm the best at what I do.
       
        Is that confidence I hear...or arrogance? Strange how often they're
        confused.

       Sorry you're disappointed.
       
        This is exactly what I'm talking about. Once again Brynjolf sends me
        someone with no backbone, no determination.

       How about we skip the conversation?
       
       You have to understand, it's been a long time since Brynjolf's sent me
       anyone I can rely on.

Dragonborn You have no faith in the guild?

Maven Faith? I don't have faith in anyone. All I care about is cause and
       effect. Did the job get done and was it done correctly. There's no gray
       area.

       You won't have that problem with me.
       
        I hope not. This is an important job. I have a competitor called
        Honningbrew Meadery that I want to put out of business. I also want to
        know how they got the place up and running so quickly.

       Where do I begin?
       
        Head to the Bannered Mare in Whiterun and ask for Mallus Maccius.
        He'll fill you in on all the details.

Dragonborn Who runs the Honningbrew Meadery?

Maven Some layabout named Sabjorn. Been a thorn in my side for the last few
       years now.

Dragonborn Sabjorn seems like more than just friendly competition.

Maven Not a day goes by that I don't regret letting Sabjorn get as far as he
       did. In only a few short years, he's taken that bile he calls mead to
       market and a chunk of my profits with it! I can't imagine where he
       found the gold to take it to market so quickly.

Dragonborn So get rid of him and he's no longer a threat.

Maven Exactly. With Sabjorn in prison, his meadery will be forced to close.
       Then I swoop in and take over the place. No more competition.

Dragonborn Why strike now?

Maven The Goldenglow Estate job has undoubtedly interrupted the supply of
       honey that I need to make my mead. Sabjorn could use this interruption
       to his advantage and take a larger share of the market. I can't have
       that.

Dragonborn How did you become Allied with the Thieves Guild?

Maven The Black-Briar family has always been allied with the Guild. Our
       connections with the Empire and within Skyrim make for a perfect fit. I
       dare say the Guild owes its survival as much to my family as it does
       to its own people.

Maven One more time in case I wasn't clear. You butcher this job and you'll be
       sorry.

[The player travels to Whiterun's inn.]

Mallus Maccius Can't a man drink in peace?

Dragonborn Maven said you're expecting me.

Mallus I'm going to keep this short 'cause we've got a lot to do.
        Honningbrew's owner, Sabjorn, is about to hold a tasting for Whiterun's
        Captain of the Guard, and we're going to poison the mead.

Dragonborn You have the poison?

Mallus No, no. That's the beauty of the whole plan. We're going to get Sabjorn
        to give it to us. The meadery has quite a pest problem and the whole
        city knows about it. Pest poison and mead don't mix well, you know what
        I mean?

Dragonborn How do I fit in?

Mallus You're going to happen by and lend poor old Sabjorn a helping hand.
        He's going to give you the poison to use on the pests, but you're also
        going to dum it into the brewing vat.

Dragonborn Clever.

Mallus Maven and I spent weeks planning this. All we need is someone like you
        to get in there and get it done. Now get going before Sabjorn grows a
        brain and hires someone else to do the dirty work.

        How do I get to the brewing vats?
        
         Both of the buildings are connected by tunnels made by the pests
         infesting the meadery. There's an entrance to it in the basement
         storeroom of the warehouse that used to be boarded over. I've already
         removed the boards so the meadery would be infested. That's where you
         should start.

         What about just going in through the brewery?
         
          Sabjorn keeps that locked up tight. If you can get through that way,
          go right ahead.

        Why are you doing all this?
        
         I made the mistake of borrowing coin from Sabjorn. He's allowing me to
         pay it back, but he's working my fingers to the bone! He treats me
         like a slave...I have to do every nasty, dirty job in the meadery.

         There's more to this than a debt, isn't there?
         
          If this plan works, not only is my debt gone, but I'll be set up for
          life. Maven and I worked out a little deal. If Sabjorn ends up in
          jail, she's going to take over his meadery. And guess who gets to run
          the Black-Briar Meadery in Whiterun? You're looking at him.

        Why bother poisoning the nest for Sabjorn?
        
         Once Sabjorn is out of the way, Maven has plans for this place. One
         way or another, we don't want the pests coming back. Consider it just
         more of the dirty work. I did my part getting them in there, now you
         need to clear them out.

        Remember, Sabjorn will be needing a helping hand. Make it look good.

[The Dragonborn goes to the meadery. Dead rats lie near the serving counter.]

Sabjorn What are you gawking at? Can't you see I have problems here?

Dragonborn Is something wrong?

Sabjorn Are you kidding me? Look at this place. I'm supposed to be holding a
         tasting of the new Honningbrew Reserve for the Captain of the Guard.
         If he sees the meadery in this state, I'll be ruined.

Dragonborn I might be able to help.

Sabjorn Oh really? And I don't suppose you'd just do it out of the kindness
         of your heart, would you? I hope you're not expecting to be paid
         until the job's done.

         That's the only way I operate. (Persuade)
         
          Well that's not how I operate, so forget it.

         You better, or I yell skeever. (Intimidate)
         
          Okay, okay. No need to make rash decisions. Here's half. You get the
          rest when the job's done. My only demand is that these vermin are
          permanently eliminated before my reputation is completely destroyed.

         Just pay me when the job's done.
         
          My only demand is that these vermin are permanently eliminated before
          my reputation is completely destroyed.

Dragonborn How do I permanently clear the vermin?

Sabjorn I bought some poison. I was going to have my lazy, good-for-nothing
         assistant Mallus handle it, but he seems to have vanished. If you
         plant this in the vermin's nest, it should stop them from ever coming
         back.

Dragonborn You've got a deal.

Sabjorn Don't come back until every one of those things are dead.

         I haven't finished the job yet.
         
          Why are you standing here then? I've told the Captain of the Guard
          we'll have the meadery cleared for the tasting and he could be here
          any minute.

         You mentioned someone named Mallus?
         
          Mallus is the best deal I've ever made. Lent him a bit of gold some
          time ago I knew he'd never be able to pay back. Nothing like free
          labor to make operating costs cheaper.

         Now I've got to clean up this mess.

[After killing the rats and the human living with them, the mead is poisoned.
 The Dragonborn returns for his payment.]

Dragonborn Job's finished.

Sabjorn Well it's about time! I had to stall the captain until you were
         finished.

Dragonborn What about my pay?

Sabjorn You'll just have to wait until after the captain's finished. I
         suppose you can wait around if you must.

Commander Caius Well, Sabjorn, now that you've taken care of your little
                 pest problem, how about I get a taste of some of your mead?

Sabjorn Help yourself, milord. It's my finest brew yet...I call it Honningbrew
         Reserve. I think you'll find it quite pleasing to your palate.

Caius Oh, come now. This is mead, not some wine meant to be sipped and
       savored. By the Eight?! What...what's in this?

Sabjorn I...I don't know. What's wrong?

Caius You assured me this place was clean! I'll see...see to it that you
       remain in irons for the rest of your days!

Sabjorn No, please! I don't understand...

Caius Silence, idiot! I should have known better...to trust this place after
       it's been riddled with filth.

Sabjorn I beg you...please! This is not what it seems!

Caius You...you're in charge until I can sort this all out.

Mallus It will be my pleasure.

Caius And you...you're coming with me to Dragonsreach. We'll see how quickly
       your memory cleans in the city's prisons. Now move.

Mallus Look, I assure you, this is all just a huge misunderstanding!

Caius I said move!

Mallus Farewell, Sabjorn.

[Caius and his prisoner leave.]

Mallus I don't think that could have gone any better. Anything else you need
        before you head back to Riften?

Dragonborn I need to get a look at Sabjorn's books.

Mallus So, Maven wants to hunt down Sabjorn's private partner, huh? You're
        welcome to take a look around Sabjorn's office. He keeps most of his
        papers stashed in his desk. Here, this should help.

        What are you going to do with this place?
        
         Start changing it over to the Black-Briar Meadery as soon as possible.
         That was Maven's part of the deal. She's put me in charge of keeping
         the mead flowing, so that's exactly what I'm going to do. If you're
         in the area and you ever need anything fenced, you just let me know.

        You never mentioned that lunatic living in the tunnels.
        
         I thought it would be better to leave some of the details out of our
         previous discussion. Didn't want to risk you walking away from the
         job. Besides, you've done Maven a favor getting rid of him and saved
         me from wasting coin hiring someone else to do it later.

        Remember to put in a good word with Maven for me.

[After finding a promissory note, it's time to report back to the Guild.]

Maven I trust you have good news for me.

Dragonborn Job's finished. Here's the information you requested.

Maven This doesn't tell me much. The only thing that can identify Sabjorn's
       partner is this odd little symbol.

Dragonborn Yes. I've seen that symbol before.

Maven Well, whoever this mysterious marking represents, they'll regret
       starting a war with me. You should bring this information to the
       Thieves Guild immediately. There's also the matter of your payment. I
       believe you'll find this more than adequate for your services.

[Back at Brynjolf's...]

Brynjolf Word on the street is that poor Sabjorn has found himself in
          Whiterun's prison. How unfortunate for him.

Dragonborn Yet very fortunate for Maven.

Brynjolf Exactly! Now you're beginning to see how our little system works.
          Maven sent word that you'd discovered something else while you were
          out there. Something important to the Guild?

Dragonborn The same symbol from Goldenglow was involved.

Brynjolf Then this is beyond coincidence. First Aringoth and now Sabjorn.
          Someone's trying to take us down by driving a wedge between Maven
          and the Guild.

Dragonborn Is there anything we can do?

Brynjolf Mercer thinks he knows a way to identify this new thorn in our side.
          He wants to meet with you right away. And if I were you, I'd hurry.
          I've never seen him this angry before.

|

|

[The player finds Mercer at his usual desk in the cistern.]

Mercer Ah, there you are. I've consulted my contacts regarding the information
        you recovered from Goldenglow Estate, but no one can identify that
        symbol.

Dragonborn I found the same marking at Honningbrew Meadery.

Mercer It would see our adversary is attempting to take us apart indirectly by
        angering Maven Black-Briar. Very clever.

        You admire them?
        
         They're well-funded and they've been able to avoid identification for
         years. I'm surprised it reached this point. Just don't mistake my
         admiration for complacency; our nemesis is going to pay dearly.

        Maybe we should recruit them.
        
        You just, but they've been able to avoid detection for years. They're
        obviously well-funded, driven and patient. Just don't mistake my
        admiration for complacency; our nemesis is going to pay dearly.

        Clever or not, they need to die.
        
         Don't dismiss our adversary so easily. They're well-funded, patient
         and have been able to avoid identification for years. However, don't
         mistake my admiration for complacency; our nemesis is going to pay
         dearly.

Dragonborn How can we make them pay?

Mercer Because, even after all their posturing and planning, they've made a
        mistake. The parchment you recovered mentions a Gajul-Lei. According
        to my sources, that's an old alias used by one of our contacts. His
        real name is Gulum-Ei. Slimy bastard.

Dragonborn Where do I begin?

Mercer Gulum-Ei is our inside man at the East Empire Company in Solitude. I'm
        betting he acted as a go-between for the sale of Goldenglow Estate and
        that he can finger our buyer. Get out there, shake him down and see
        what you come up with. Talk to Brynjolf before you leave if you have
        any questions.

        Aringoth was a fool to think he could get away with this.

[If one goes to get extra info]

Brynjolf I can't believe Gulum-Ei's mixed up in all this; that Argonian
          couldn't find his tail with both hands. Don't get me wrong. He could
          scam a beggar out of his last septim...but he's no mastermind.

Dragonborn Think he'll give me trouble?

Brynjolf Trouble? He's one of the most stubborn lizards I've ever met! You
          have your work cut out for you.

Dragonborn So how do I get him to talk?

Brynjolf You're going to have to buy him off; it's the only way to get his
          attention. If that fails, follow him and see what he's up to. If I
          know Gulum-Ei, he's in way over his head and you'll be able to use
          it as leverage.

          Betrayal or not, I'll let him live.
          
           I'm glad to see you're embracing our methods. It would be a waste to
           lose a contact at the East Empire Company before we had the entire
           story. Just keep on Gulum-Ei's tail and he's bound to step in
           something he can't scrape off his boot.

          He's going to owe us for this betrayal.
          
           Aye, he does indeed...and with his fingers in the East Empire
           Company's pie, we'll make good use of that debt. If I'm not being
           clear enough, that means we don't want him killed. For now, just
           keep on his tail and he's bound to step in something he can't scrape
           off his boot.

          If he's betrayed us, I'll kill him.
          
           No, no, Mercer wants him alive. For now. Stubborn or not, he's the
           only contact we have at the East Empire Company. Just keep on his
           tail and he's bound to step in something he can't scrape off his
           boot.

          East Empire Company? Who are they?
          
           A mercantile group that has established ports all over Tamriel. They
           pretty much dominate the whole shipping industry. The Emperor
           himself supposedly backs them, which means they have fairly
           unlimited resources...so don't get their feathers in a ruffle.

          If I get information from Gulum-Ei, what then?
          
           Just head right back to the Guild and get the information to Mercer.
           Nothing else is more important. If you discover Gulum-Ei's holding
           out on us and hs more loot stashed away than he claims, we'd find
           that information quite valuable as well.

          You think Gulum-Ei will give me trouble?
          
           There are thieves and there is Gulum-Ei. No honor, no code at all.
           He'd shake your hand and stab you in the back at the same time. The
           cut he's supposed to provide the Guild has dwindled as of late. He
           says pickings in the warehouse are slim, but I'm certain he's lying.
           Keep your eyes on him; he's quite crafty.

          How is Gulum-Ei an asset to the Guild?
          
           Gulum-Ei works in the East Empire Company warehouse. He helps
           maintain all of the shipments of goods that goes in and out of
           Solitude. That means he has the pick of the litter from some of the
           finest goods to grace Skyrim's shores. He isn't exactly in the
           Guild, but he pays us a cut of all the stuff he lifts from the
           warehouse.

          Good luck in Solitude. Keep Gulum-Ei alive, but remind him who we
          are.

[The Argonian is found at Solitude's Winking Skeever tavern.]

Gulum-Ei So, what do we have here? Hmm...let me guess. By your scent, I'd say
          you were from the Guild. But that can't be true, because I told
          Mercer I wouldn't deal with them anymore.

Dragonborn I'm here about Goldenglow Estate.

Gulum-Ei I don't deal in land or property. Now, if you're looking for goods,
          you've come to the right person.

Dragonborn You can drop the act now...Gajul-Lei.

Gulum-Ei Oh, wait...did you say Goldenglow Estate? My apologies. I'm sorry to
          say I know very little about that...bee farm, was it?

Dragonborn You acted as a broker for its new owner.

Gulum-Ei Maybe I did, maybe I didn't. I can't be expected to remember every
          deal I handle.

          Identify the buyer and we'll forget what we know. (Persuade)
          
           I don't care what you promise. If I tell you the buyer's name and
           word gets around, it could ruin me!

          What would it take to identify the buyer? (Bribe)
          
           Well, now that you mention it, there is something I've been trying
           to get my hands on. I have a buyer looking for a case of Firebrand
           Wine. There just so happens to be a single case in the Blue Palace.
           Bring it to me, and we'll talk about Goldenglow Estate.

          Give me the buyer's name or I'll kill you. (Intimidate)
          
           Hasn't Mercer Frey taught you people anything? You kill me and your
           only contact with the East Empire Company vanishes. That's not smart
           for business.

[Dragonborn steals a case of wine from the jarl's palace, then returns.]

Dragonborn I have the Firebrand Wine.

Gulum-Ei Ah, I see you have the wine. Hand it over and we'll talk. Good. Can't
          have the buyer getting impatient and looking elsewhere for this, can
          we? Here, take this. I certainly can't use it, but I suppose I need
          to pay you something for the goods.

Dragonborn You're trying to bribe me now?

Gulum-Ei Not at all. I consider it an investment in prolonging my life. As far
          as Goldenglow Estate goes, I'll tell you what I know. I was
          approached by a woman who wanted me to act as the broker for
          something big. She flashed a bag of gold in my face and said all I
          had to do was pay Aringoth for the estate. I brought him the coin and
          walked away with her copy of the deed.

Dragonborn Did she say why she was doing this?

Gulum-Ei Not at all. I tend not to ask too many questions when I'm on the
          job. I'm sure you understand. However, I did notice she was quite
          angry and it was being directed at Mercer Frey.

Dragonborn That's it? No name or anything?

Gulum-Ei In this business we rarely deal in names; our identity comes from how
          much coin we carry.

Dragonborn I think you're lying to me.

Gulum-Ei Look, that's all I know. I never promised you I'd have all the
          answers. Now, since our transaction is done, I'll be on my way.

[The broker leaves and gets tailed into the East Empire Warehouse. Gulum-Ei
 uses a sheltered route behind some crates to reach a loot-filled cavern, a
 fact he's soon confronts him over.]

Gulum-Ei Now, there's no need to do anything rash... This isn't as bad as it
          seems. I was going to tell Mercer about everything, honestly!
          Please...he'll have me killed!

          Mercer doesn't have to know.
          
           I see you wish to be reasonable. Perhaps I misjudged you. The name
           of the person you want is Karliah.

          Tell me first, and then I'll decide.
          
           Alright, alright... It's Karliah...her name is Karliah.

          Tell me now or I'll kill you where you stand!
          
           No, please! There's no need for that! I'll tell you everything. It's
           Karliah...her name is Karliah.

Dragonborn You say that name like I should know it.

Gulum-Ei Mercer never told you about her? Karliah is the thief responsible for
          murdering the previous Guild Master, Gallus. Now she's after Mercer.

Dragonborn And you're helping her?

Gulum-Ei Help...? No, no! Look, I didn't even know it was her until after she
          contacted me. Please, you have to believe me!

Dragonborn Where is Karliah now?

Gulum-Ei I don't know. When I asked her where she was going, she just
          muttered where the end began. Here, take the Goldenglow Estate
          deed as proof. And when you speak to Mercer, tell him I'm worth more
          to him alive.

          I'll keep quiet about your scam, but you owe me.
          
           Now you're speaking my language. Tell you what, if you need any
           stolen goods fenced, you bring them to me and I'll pay you good
           money for them. Consider me your new friend in the north.

          I'm keeping the deed. Any objections?
          
           Consider it a gift to ensure your silence. That thing seems to be
           bringing me nothing but trouble anyway. Karliah didn't even want it,
           she wanted to keep the sale a secret. I can see how well that went.

          Why did Karliah purchase Goldenglow Estate?
          
           I asked her the same thing and she wouldn't come out and tell me.
           But now that I know who she is, I'd say she's trying to hit the
           Thieves Guild where it hurts.

           How would that hurt the guild?
           
            Maven Black-Briar needs Goldenglow's honey for her mead. She's been
            using the Guild to keep the Estate under her thumb. If the owner
            cuts the Guild out of the picture, he's cutting Maven out of the
            picture...which she can't afford. If I was Maven, I'd blame the
            Guild for weakening and not being able to handle the place.

            Which makes Maven lose faith in us.
            
             Exactly. For the Guild to survive, they need Maven's support. This
             Karliah must have spent a lot of time and resources planning this.

          Now, you won't forget to tell Mercer I cooperated, will you?

[The player returns to the Guild.]

Mercer Did Gulum-Ei give up any information on our buyer?

Dragonborn He said Goldenglow was purchased by a Karliah.

Mercer No, it...it can't be. I haven't heard that name in decades. This is
        grave news indeed, she's someone I hoped to never cross paths with
        again.

Dragonborn Gulum-Ei also told me she was a murderer.

Mercer Karliah destroyed everything this guild stood for. She murdered my
        predecessor in cold blood and betrayed the Guild. After we discovered
        what she'd done, we spent months trying to track her down, but she just
        vanished.

Dragonborn Why has she returned?

Mercer Karliah and I were like partners. I went with her on every heist. We
        watched each other's backs. I know her techniques, her skills. If she
        kills me, there'll be no one left that could possibly catch her. If
        only we knew where she was...

Dragonborn Gulum-Ei told me she said, Where the end began.

Mercer There's only one place that could be. The place where she murdered
        Gallus...a ruin called Snow Veil Sanctum. We have to go out there
        before she disappears again.

Dragonborn We?

Mercer Yes, I'm going with you and together we're going to kill her. Here's
        your payment for Solitude. Prepare yourself and meet me at the ruins
        as soon as you can. We can't let her slip through our fingers.

|

|

[The player goes to Snow Veil Sanctum in Winterhold.]

Mercer Good, you're finally here. I've scouted the ruins and I'm certain
        Karliah is still inside.

Dragonborn You saw her?

Mercer No, I found her horse. Don't worry, I've taken care of it...she won't
        be using it to escape. Let's get moving, I want to catch her inside
        while she's distracted. Take the lead.

        You want me to lead?
        
         I'm sorry, I was under the impression I was in charge. You're leading
         and I'm following. Does that seem clear to you?

        Understood.
        
         Just make certain you keep your eyes open. Karliah is as sharp as a
         blade. The last thing I need is you blundering into a trap and warning
         her that we're here.

        How did Gallus die?
        
         Twenty-five years ago, I was standing outside these very same ruins.
         Gallus told me to meet here but he wouldn't say why. When I arrived,
         Gallus stepped from the shadows. Before he uttered a sound, an arrow
         pierced his throat. Before I could even draw my blade, her second
         arrow found its mark in my chest.

         So Karliah took on both of you alone?
         
          Karliah was a master marksman and her greatest weapon was the element
          of surprise. I was lucky...she missed my heart by mere inches. I
          staggered away from the ruins and my vision began to blur. It's then
          that I realized the bitch had poisoned her arrows.

          And Gallus?
          
           The last thing I saw was Karliah dumping his body into an opening
           atop the ruins; an unceremonious end for a remarkable man. To this
           day, I've regretted letting her escape, even if it had meant I died
           trying. I owed Gallus that much.

           What happened after Gallus died?
           
            The Guild was thrown into disarray. Several stepped up and tried to
            claim Gallus' former position as Guild Master. Sides quickly formed
            behind these men and the Ratway became a bloodbath.

            And you were a part of this?
            
             I saw what they did to Gallus. I wanted to use the Guild's
             resources to hunt down Karliah. The others didn't even care he was
             gone. Fortunately, I perservered and the other groups were either
             killed or they left Skyrim.

             And what of Karliah?
             
              The in-fighting had taken months to subside, which gave her time
              to go into hiding and carefully cover her tracks. I spent
              thousands of septims and used every contact at my disposal, but
              it was as if she had simply vanished...like I said before, she
              was the best.

        Tell me about Karliah.
        
         She was a stubborn Dunmer...always had to do everything her way. But
         she was also the best...bringing in more coin a month than some
         thieves heist in a year. Gallus trusted her too much and let her get
         too close.

          So, they had a relationship.
          
           If you want to call it that, yes. Me? I think she was softening him
           for the kill. Gallus would call her his little nightingale. He was
           absolutely smitten by her.

           Why did she kill him?
           
            Greed? Jealousy? Spite? Who can say what drove her to such an
            iniquitous act. One thing's certain I intend to find out before
            she draws her last breath.

        Isn't murder Dark Brotherhood territory?
        
         I have a long-standing arrangement with the Dark Brotherhood. If I
         need someone in the Guild taken care of, we do it ourselves. We both
         agree it's best to keep these matters in-house.

        Let's get going. I want her head on my mantle.

[They arrive at the ruins' locked entrance.]

Mercer They say that these ancient Nordic burial mounds are sometimes
        impenetrable. This one doesn't look too difficult. Quite simple,
        really. I don't know what all the fuss is about these locks. All it
        takes is a bit of know-how and a lot of skill. That should do it.
        After you.

[The two head inside.]

Mercer The stench in here...this place smells of death. Be on your guard.
        Pull the chain over there and watch out for the spikes. Looks like
        Karliah reset all the traps.

[They fight off boatloads of awakened draugr.]

Mercer Karliah always was a nimble minx...slipping past these draugr must be
        child's play for her. We're on the right track. She's been through
        here as well.

[After more fighting, a long passage is revealed.]

Mercer That door up ahead...looks perfect for hiding an ambush. Be ready.

[They come to a door requiring a specific claw object.]

Mercer Ah, it's one of the infamous Nordic puzzle doors. How quaint. Without
        the matching claw, they're normally impossible to open. And since I'm
        sure Karliah already did away with it, we're on our own. Fortunately,
        these doors have a weakness if you know how to exploit it. Quite
        simple, really.

[He opens the door easily.]

Mercer Karliah's close, I'm certain of it. Now let's get moving.

[As they enter the next room, the player is dropped to the floor by a hidden
 arrow containing paralytic portion. They can only watch the scene between
 Mercer and Karliah play out.]

Mercer Do you honestly think your arrow will reach me before my blade finds
        your heart?

Karliah Give me a reason to try.

Mercer You're a clever girl, Karliah. Buying Goldenglow Estate and funding
        Honningbrew Meadery was inspired.

Karliah To ensure an enemy's defeat, you must first undermine his allies. It
         was the first lesson Gallus taught us.

Mercer You always were a quick study.

Karliah Not quick enough, otherwise Gallus would still be alive.

Mercer Gallus had his wealth and he had you. All he had to do was look the
        other way.

Karliah Did you forget the oath we took as Nightingales? Did you expect him
         to simply ignore your methods?

Mercer Enough of this mindless banter! Come, Karliah! It's time for you and
        Gallus to become reunited!

[Instead, she drinks an invisibility potion.]

Karliah I'm no fool, Mercer. Crossing blades with you would be a death
         sentence. But I can promise the next time we meet, it will be your
         undoing.

[She slips away. Mercer goes and stands over the player.]

Mercer How interesting. It appears Gallus's history has repeated itself.
        Karliah has provided me the means to be rid of you, and this ancient
        tomb becomes your final resting place. But do you know what intrigues
        me the most? The fact that this was all possible because of you.
        Farewell. I'll be certain to give Brynjolf your regards.

[He stabs the player, walking away as they bleed out. Later, the player wakes
 up in front of the Sanctum. Karliah is there.]

Karliah Easy, easy. Don't get up so quickly. How are you feeling?

Dragonborn Hold on...you shot me!

Karliah No, I saved your life. My arrow was tipped with a unique paralytic
         poison. It slowed your heart and kept you from bleeding out. Had I
         intended to kill you, we wouldn't be having this conversation.

Dragonborn Why save me?

Karliah My original intention was to use that arrow on Mercer, but I never had
         a clear shot. I made a split-second decision to get you out of the
         way and it prevented your death.

         Then I'm in your debt.
         
          More than you'll ever realize.

         Why should I believe you?
         
          Without the antidote I administered, you'd be as still as a statue.
          I treated your wounds and didn't leave you defenseless.

         You should have shot Mercer instead.
         
          I promise you, the thought crossed my mind.

         The poison on that arrow took me a year to perfect; I only had enough
         for a single shot. All I had hoped was to capture Mercer alive.

Dragonborn Why capture Mercer alive?

Karliah Mercer must be brought before the Guild to answer for what he's done.
         He needs to pay for Gallus' murder.

Dragonborn How will you prove it now?

Karliah My purpose in using Snow Veil Sanctum to ambush Mercer wasn't simply
         for irony's sake. Before both of you arrived, I recovered a journal
         from Gallus' remains. I suspect the information we need is written
         inside.

Dragonborn Well, what's it say?

Karliah I wish I knew. The journal is written in some sort of language I've
         never seen before.

Dragonborn Perhaps it could be translated.

Karliah Enthir...Gallus' friend at the College of Winterhold. Of course...
         It's the only outside Gallus trusted with the knowledge of his
         Nightingale identity.

Dragonborn There's that word again, Nightingale.

Karliah There were three of us Myself, Gallus and Mercer. We were an
         anonymous splinter of the Thieves Guild in Riften. Perhaps I'll tell
         you more about it later. Right now, you need to head for Winterhold
         with the journal and get the translation. Here, take these as well,
         they may prove useful for your journey.

         Can't you come with me to Winterhold?
         
          I'm afraid not. There are preparations to make and Gallus' remains
          to lay to rest. I promise to join you there as soon as I can.

         Tell me about Gallus.
         
          He was a scholar, a master thief and a natural leader. Everyone
          respected him and followed him without question. It was Gallus who
          inducted me into the Nightingales and honed my skills to a
          razor-sharp point. I owe everything to him. We were...very close.

          You were lovers?
          
           Gallus once said he felt comfortable around me; able to let his
           guard down. I can't help but think that I'm responsible for what
           happened to him.

         Why didn't you kill Mercer?
         
          Mercer lied to the Guild, branded me a murderer and slandered my name
          across his network of contacts. For twenty-five years I ran, never
          sleeping in the same place twice and carefully covering my tracks.
          Mercer doesn't need to die...he needs to feel the cold sting of fate
          as his life crumbles in front of him and he's hunted by the Guild.

          Might not have a choice next time.
          
           I can promise you if it comes to that, and my back's to the wall, I
           won't hesitate.

         Remember, speak only to Enthir. Trust no one else.

|

|

[Enthir is found at Winterhold's inn.]

Enthir Yes, yes, what is it?

Dragonborn I've been sent by Karliah.

Enthir Karliah? Then she's finally found it. Do you have Gallus' journal?

Dragonborn Yes, but there's a problem.

Enthir A problem? Let me see it. This is just like Gallus. A dear friend, but
        always too clever for his own good. He's written all of the text in
        the Falmer language.

Dragonborn Can you translate it?

Enthir No. However, I know someone who might. The court wizard of Markarth,
        Calcelmo, may have the materials you need to get this journal
        translated. A word of warning Calcelmo is a fierce guardian of his
        research. Getting the information won't be easy.

        What exactly is a Falmer?
        
         In the time before man, they were known as the snow elves. They lived
         in the sunlight and had a very prosperous society.

         So they were like your kind?
         
          Like the Altmer? Yes, I would say their culture quite possibly
          rivaled our own.

          What drove them underground?
          
           The Nords went to war with the Falmer in the First Era. Killed them
           by the thousands to drive them from their snowy homeland. The Falmer
           retreated underground and forged an uneasy alliance with the
           dwarves, who ended up betraying them. This betrayal made them what
           they are now...horrible, blind monstrosities with a burning hatred
           of any but their own kind.

           They sound more like victims to me.
           
            Yes, I suppose you're right. Forgive me. I've lost several close
            friends to the Falmer and it tends to distort my view.

           You appear to despise them.
           
            Why shouldn't I? The Falmer have killed more than a fair share of
            my acquaintances. They're animals...they show absolutely no pity
            or remorse.

           Then I'll make it a point to hunt them down.
           
            Good. I lost more than a few acquaintances to the Falmer and I wish
            to see them avenged.

           If you wish to learn more about them, you're welcome to my tome on
           the subject. Should be on my table.

        What can you tell me about Gallus?
        
         He was a dear friend of mine and a surprisingly astute pupil of
         academia...I was devastated when he was killed. I suppose that risk
         always coexisted with his line of work; I just never thought his luck
         would run out.

         He was an academic yet he chose a different path. Why?
         
          Well, for the thrill, of course. He was quite clear that he felt more
          in his element climbing through a window than hunched over a dusty
          tome.

          How did you meet him?
          
           Ah, yes, quite an amusing anecdote actually. I caught him trying to
           break into my laboratory. I was about to show him the error of his
           ways when he made a curiously astute comment about my research
           notes. I was astounded and it in turn lead to a conversation. Who'd
           have imagined it would lead to such a strong friendship?

        Why did Gallus scribe his journal in Falmer?
        
         Besides the fact that there are only a handful of people in Tamriel
         that even recognize the language? I'm fairly certain he was planning
         some sort of a heist that involved a deep understanding of the Falmer
         language. Sadly, we never had the opportunity to speak about the
         details.

         Where did he acquire the knowledge to use it?
         
          Ironically, I pointed him in the same direction I pointed you, to
          Markarth and Calcelmo. I'm only hoping whatever means he used to
          learn the language will still be available to you.

        Calcelmo is stubborn as a mule. Be careful when you speak to him.

[The player finds Markath's court wizard.]

Calcelmo Look, I'm very busy, so this better be important. What are you doing
          here? The excavation site is closed. I don't need any more workers or
          guards.

Dragonborn I was looking for you, actually.

Calcelmo I told you I'm not hiring any more guards. Why do you people always
          bother me when I'm trying to finish my research? You idiot. Do you
          even know who I am? The most recognized scholar on the Dwemer in all
          of Tamriel, and you people keep bothering me! I...I'm sorry, I...I
          got too excited. I'm in the middle of some very...stressful work,
          and I shouldn't have yelled. How can I help you?

Dragonborn I hear you're the authority on ancient Falmer.

Calcelmo Then you were well informed. I am at this very moment on the cusp of
          completing my magnum opus on the subject. I'm calling it Calcelmo's
          Guide to the Falmer Tongue. It will revolutionize the way we
          understand those ancient beings.

Dragonborn Perhaps I could view your work?

Calcelmo Preposterous! That research represents years of personal toil in some
          of the most dangerous Dwemer ruins in Skyrim! You must be mad to
          think I'd allow anyone to see it before it's completed.

          Even after everything I did for you and Faleen?²
          
           Well, I'm not blind to the fact that you've been instrumental in
           improving my affairs of the heart. If you wish, you may enter my
           tower to view the museum section, but I'm afraid the laboratories
           are still off-limits. That's the best I can offer.

          But I'm a great admirer of your work. (Persuade)
          
           While I appreciate the sentiment, I still have to decline. Being an
           admirer, I'm sure you can appreciate the need to keep my research
           a secret.

          What will it cost to change your mind? (Bribe)
          
           I'm not certain how many scholars you're accustomed to dealing with,
           but I can assure you personal wealth is our lowest priority.

          Grant me access or you'll regret it. (Intimidate)
          
           Do you realize that at the snap of my finger, I can bring the entire
           Markarth city guard to my defense? You best rethink this course of
           action or you may find yourself on the executioner's block.

          Forget it. Maybe I'll come back later.
          
           Very well. Perhaps when my research is complete, I'll feel more
           comfortable discussing my findings with you.

[The Dragonborn enters the museum, then slips into the laboratories. He can
 overhear Aicantar, Calcelmo's nephew, in the distance.]

Aicantar You heard me, captain -- our work must not be disturbed. Kill any
          intruders on sight. Call for backup if you need it. But let no one
          through.

Wizards' Guard ...As you say, sir.

[After some slipping through the guard detail, the player sneaks into the
 research tower and finds a Falmer language Rosetta Stone for cracking the
 language. He takes a rubbing and prepares to leave, just as more guards are
 coming in.]

Aicantar Yes, I'm positive I heard something!

Captain Aquilius I...oh, alright. If there is a thief, he won't leave this
                  tower alive. But shouldn't we inform Master Calcelmo?

Aicantar I'll deal with my uncle. Just...go! Scour this place from top to
          bottom!

[The Dragonborn escapes and returns to Enthir in Winterhold. Karliah's there.]

Enthir Back, eh? And how was our friend Calcelmo?

Dragonborn This should help translate Gallus' journal.

Enthir I suppose it would be inappropriate of me to ask how you obtained this,
        so I simply won't. A rubbing, eh? Odd. I expected notes.

Dragonborn It's quite the tale.

Enthir I undertstand¹. Now, let me take a good look at this. Over here,
        please. Hmm... This is intriguing, but highly disturbing. It appears
        Gallus had suspicions about Mercer Frey's allegiance to the Guild for
        months. Gallus had begun to uncover what he calls an ...unduly lavish
        lifestyle replete with spending vast amounts of gold on personal
        pleasures.

Karliah Does the journal say where this wealth came from?

Enthir Yes. Gallus seems certain that Mercer had been removing funds from the
        Guild's treasury without anyone's knowledge.

Karliah Anything else, Enthir? Anything about...the Nightingales?

Enthir Hmm. Yes, here it is. The last few pages seem to describe the failure
        of the Nightingales, although it doesn't go into great detail. Gallus
        also repeatedly mentions his strong belief that Mercer desecrated
        something known as the Twilight Sepulcher.

Karliah Shadows preserve us. So it's true...

Enthir I'm not familiar with the Twilight Sepulcher. What is it? What's Mercer
        Frey done?

Karliah I'm sorry, Enthir. I can't say. All that matters is we deliver your
         translation to the Guild immediately. Farewell, Enthir...words can't
         express...

Enthir It's alright, Karliah. You don't have to say a word. Listen, all I want
        is the truth to be revealed to the Guild. They respected Karliah, and
        she deserves better. Do whatever you can and I'll consider it a
        personal favor.

Dragonborn Thank you, Enthir.

Enthir If you ever manage to gain entry to the College, and you find trying to
        rid yourself of stolen goods becoming a burden, come visit me. I've
        been known to handle items of questionable interest from time to time
        and I'll see what I can do.

Karliah You must hasten to Riften before Mercer can do any more damage to the
         Guild.

Dragonborn Gallus' journal mentioned the Twilight Sepulcher.

Karliah You've come this far, so I see no harm in concealing it any longer.
         The Twilight Sepulcher is the temple to Nocturnal. It's what the
         Nightingales are sworn to protect at all costs.

Dragonborn Why does it require that type of protection?

Karliah Everything that represents Nocturnal's influence is contained within
         the walls of the Sepulcher. Now it seems Mercer's broken his oath
         with Nocturnal and defiled the very thing he swore to protect.

Dragonborn Thieves and temples. It just doesn't add up.

Karliah I felt the same way when Gallus first revealed these things to me. I
         think given time, you'll understand what I mean.

Dragonborn I'd understand better if less mystery was involved.

Karliah As a Nightingale, I've been sworn to secrecy regarding the Sepulcher.
         I know the Guild doesn't do much to foster faith, but I'm going to
         have to ask that you continue to trust me.

Dragonborn Very well, we do it your way for now.

Karliah I'll make for Riften and scout the situation; see if I can discover
         what Mercer's up to. When you're ready, meet me at the Ragged Flagon.
         In the meantime, I wanted you to have this. It belonged to Gallus, but
         given the circumstances I think he'd approve.

Dragonborn I'll put it to good use.

Karliah If the Guild isn't willing to listen to reason, you might have to.

[He takes Gallus' Nightingale Blade and makes for the Flagon.]

|

|

[Karliah waits at the Flagon's entrance, far away from the sitting area.]

Karliah I'm glad you're here. I think some of these people are beginning to
         suspect who I am. Are you ready to face the Guild?

         I'm ready. Let's go.
         
          Keep your eyes open. I'm not sure what to expect when we enter the
          cistern.

         What if Mercer's there?
         
          Then we'll show them Gallus' journal and hope for the best. Remember,
          we've got proof and all he's got is his word.

         No, I'm not.
         
          Time is of the essence here, please hurry back.

[A thief is waiting behind the false cabinet.]

Garthar They're waiting for you in the cistern. No tricks.

[The cistern is filled with the guildmembers, all readying their sword arms.]

Brynjolf You better have a damn good reason to be here with that murderer.

Karliah Please, lower your weapons so we can speak. I have proof that you've
         all bee misled!

Brynjolf No tricks, Karliah, or I'll cut you down where you stand. Now what's
          this so-called proof you speak of?

Karliah I have Gallus' journal. I think you'll find its contents disturbing.

Brynjolf Let me see. No, it...it can't be. This can't be true. I've known
          Mercer too long...

Karliah It's true, Brynjolf. Every word. Mercer's been stealing from the Guild
         for years, right under your noses.

Brynjolf There's only one way to find out if what the lass says is true.
          Delvin, I'll need you to open the Vault.

Delvin Wait just a blessed moment, Bryn. What's in that book? What did it say?

Brynjolf It says Mercer's been stealing from our vault for years. Gallus was
          looking into it before he was murdered.

Delvin How could Mercer open up a vault that needs two keys? It's impossible.
        Could he pick his way in?

Vex That door has the best puzzle locks money can buy. There's no way it can
     be picked open.

Karliah He didn't need to pick the lock.

Delvin What's she on about?

Brynjolf Use your key on the vault, Delvin. We'll open it up and find out the
          truth.

[Delvin fulfills his role.]

Delvin I've used my key, but the vault's still locked up tighter than a drum.
        Now use yours.

[Brynjolf uses his. The vault's contents are laid bare.]

Brynjolf By the Eight! It's gone, everything's gone! Get in here, all of you!

Delvin The gold, the jewels...it's all gone.

Vex That son of a bitch! I'll kill him!

Brynjolf Vex! Put it away...right now. We can't afford to lose our heads...we
          need to calm down and focus.

Delvin Do what he says, Vex. This ain't helpin' right now.

Vex Fine. We do it your way. For now.

Brynjolf Delvin, Vex...watch the Flagon. If you see Mercer, come tell me
          right away.

[Other guild members can comment on the recent heist or situation. This is
 optional, but still worth noting somewhere.]

Delvin This is gettin' dangerous. Don't let anythin' get the jump on you.
Delvin Stabbed in the back. It's like the Dark Brotherhood all over again.

Vex If I see Frey, I'll pluck his eyes from his skull with my bare hands!
Vex Need to stay focused in case Frey comes back, make it fast.

Rune How can Karliah remain so calm when Mercer had her on the run for that
      long? Amazing.

Cynric I never saw this coming. I thought we were just having a run of bad
        luck.

Ravyn Imyan Vex is ready to tear you apart. I hope you have a good excuse for
             bringing Karliah here.

Niruin Vex better leave a piece of Mercer for us. It's payback time.

Garthar If I find Mercer first, I'm going to crush his skull with my bare
         hands!

Thrynn I won't rest until Mercer's dead. How could he murder Gallus and betray
        all of us like that?

Sapphire I dare Mercer to come back here! He takes one step in the cistern
          and I'll cut it off!

Vipir the Fleet I can't believe he emptied the vault. Right from under our
                 noses.

Tonilia There's no doubt Mercer will make for the borders of Skyrim. I hope
         you find him before he escapes our grasp. If you find Mercer, give no
         quarter...kill him and be done with it.

Vekel the Man Word is Mercer Frey is a dead man. The Guild wants his blood. I
               can't say I blame them. Murder is not our way. Gallus was before
               my time, but I still can't believe it. You need to teach him a
               lesson...show him the penalty for betrayal around here.

[Back to the mandatory stuff...]

Brynjolf Look, before I help you track Mercer down, I need to know what you
          learned from Karliah. I mean everything.

          Mercer killed Gallus, not Karliah.
          
           Aye, I feared that was the case. From that last entry in Gallus's
           diary, it looks like he was getting close to exposing Mercer to the
           Guild. Anything else?

          Gallus, Karliah and Mercer were Nightingales.
          
           What? Nightingales? But, I always just assumed they were a tale...
           a way to keep the young footpads in line. Was there anything else
           she told you?

          Karliah was behind Goldenglow and Honningbrew.
          
           Trying to make Mercer look bad in front of Maven, eh? Clever lass.
           Was there anything else?

          No, that's it.
          
           Then, I have an important task for you. I need you to break into
           Mercer's home and search for anything that tells us where he could
           have gone.

Dragonborn He has a house in Riften?

Brynjolf Aye, a gift from the Black-Briars when the kicked the previous family
          out...place called Riftweald Manor. He never stays there, just pays
          for the upkeep on it. Hired some lout by the name of Vald to guard
          the place.

Dragonborn I'll take care of it.

Brynjolf Be careful, lad. This is the last place in Skyrim I'd ever want to
          send you. Just find a way in, get the information and leave. And you
          have permission to kill anyone who stands in your way.

          What's the best way to get into Riftweald Manor?
          
           Good question. I've only set foot inside a few times myself and
           that was in Mercer's company. If you can get past his trained
           watchdog, I think your best bet might be the ramp to the second
           floor balcony in his backyard.

           I don't suppose the ramp is easy to access.
           
            No. It's some sort of crazy contraption commissioned for quick
            escapes. I'd wager a well-placed shot at the ramp's mechanism would
            lower it in a hurry.

          What's missing from the vault?
          
           Better question would be what did he leave. Mercer took
           everything. Even all of our plans are gone.

           Plans for what?
           
            Before Mercer took over, Gallus started collecting every bit of
            material on locations the Guild could heist. Museums, keeps,
            estates...you name it. By the time Mercer took over the Guild we
            must have had a few dozen.

            How could he have opened the vault door alone?
            
             I don't have a clue. That door is impenetrable. Without two keys,
             it's impossible to open. I have a key, Delvin has a key, and
             Mercer has a key. That's it. There are no other copies.

          You mentioned a watchdog?
          
           That'd be Vald. A real piece of work, that one. Mercer's holding
           something over his head, keeping him loyal. Talk to Vex. She used
           to know him very well...if you catch my meaning.

          Careful at Mercer's place, I don't want to lose anyone else to that
          madman.

[If the player speaks to Vex on the matter...]

Dragonborn Brynjolf said you have info on Vald.

Vex That pig? Oh, I have info on him. More than you care to know.

Dragonborn I want to get on his good side.

Vex Vald? Good side? I think you have the wrong person. The only thing Vald
     understands is gold. A man after my own heart.

Dragonborn So, buy him off?

Vex Sure, but he'll ask for a whole lot. I mean, you are asking him to betray
     Mercer Frey. Your best bet would be to erase his debt with Maven
     Black-Briar. If you talk to her, she might be able to give you the
     details. Of course, you could just run him through and take what you need
     off his corpse...I could care less. While you're in there, help yourself
     to anything in Frey's manor. I would.

[If the player speaks to Vald]

Vald This is Mercer Frey's place and he don't like visitors. Now go away.

Dragonborn I need to get inside Mercer's house.

Vald No visitors. No way. Now piss off before ya make me mad.

      Mercer needs you in Markarth right away! (Persuade)
      
       Oh, come on, I ain't that dumb.

      I'll make it worth your while. (Bribe)
      
       You ain't got enough coin to make my problems go away, unless ya can
       talk to Maven Black-Briar into lettin' me outta my debt. You try and
       set one foot in this yard and I'll cut it off.

      Let me in or I'll kill you. (Intimidate)
      
       Hahaha! That's funny. Ya think you can take me on? Try it anytime. I've
       been itching for a fight.

[If one then speaks to Maven]

Dragonborn I'd like to erase Vald's debt.

Maven Vald? Why would you want to help that idiot? He owes me a steep debt.
       In fact, he's lucky all I did was force him to work for Mercer.

Dragonborn What did he do?

Maven A few years back, I commissioned a unique quill from a good friend of
       mine in Winterhold. Vald was tasked with getting it here safely and it
       ended up at the bottom of Lake Honrich.

Dragonborn He's in debt because of a quill?

Maven The wizards call it the Quill of Gemination and demanded a tremendous
       amount of gold to have it made. If you can locate the quill and return
       it to me, something Vald was too stupid to do himself, I'll consider
       the debt satisfied.

       What is the Quill of Gemination?
       
        The quill was supposed to allow me to duplicate any writing I'm viewing
        in exacting detail. I'm sure you understand how useful that would
        prove in a business situation, especially where signatures were
        involved.

        What if someone else got their hands on it?
        
         Fortunately, the quill required an ink with a unique formula known
         only to myself. So if you're getting any ideas abou selling it to
         someone else or keeping it, you'll find it would hold little value.

       How did it end up in Lake Honrich?
       
        I had Vald meet the caravan from Winterhold on the western end of the
        lake so he could avoid the roads. The idiot got lost in the mist and
        ran his boat right over some rocks, sending it straight to the bottom.
        He's too stupid to remember where he was, and any attempt I've made to
        find it in the past has been unsuccessful.

        Any ideas where I can look?
        
         Vald said his rowboat struck some rocks...I'd check under the water
         near one of the small islands in the lake. Perhaps you should start
         at the docks and work your way out towards Goldenglow Estate.

       I believe we're done.

[If the player recovers the Quill]

Dragonborn I found the Quill of Gemination.

Maven Really? I wrote that off a long time ago. Well, I suppose I need to
       fulfill my end of the bargain. Give this document to Vald. It frees him
       from the debt, but I never want to see him in Riften again.

[If the player brings the note to Vald]

Dragonborn I have something of yours.

Vald Of mine? What is it?

Dragonborn Here, it's your debt with Maven. You're free.

Vald I can't believe it! How'd ya talk her into this? Never mind, I don't
      care. I'm just glad I don't gotta work for Maven anymore. Here, ya did
      me a favor, I guess I owe you one.

[He gives over the key and walks off. Either way, the player will enter the
 house's hidden room and uncover Mercer's heist plans. Upon returning to
 Brynjolf...]

Brynjolf I've scoured the town and I've spoken to every contact we have left.
          No sign of Mercer. Any luck on your end?

Dragonborn He wasn't here, but I found these plans.

Brynjolf Shor's beard! He's going after the Eyes of the Falmer? That was
          Gallus's pet project. If he gets his hands on them, you can be
          certain he'll be gone for good and set up for life.

Dragonborn Then we have to stop him.

Brynjolf Agreed. He's taken everything the Guild has left, and to go after
          one of the last greatest heists is just an insult. I've spoken to
          Karliah, and made amends for how the Guild's treated her. Now she
          wishes to speak with both of us. Quickly, we have no time to lose.

|

|

[Karliah walks over.]

Karliah Brynjolf, the time has come to decide Mercer's fate. Until a new
         Guild Master is chosen, the decision falls to you.

Brynjolf Aye, lass...and I've come to a decision. Mercer Frey tried to kill
          both of you, he betrayed the Guild, murdered Gallus and made us
          question our future. He needs to die.

Karliah We have to be very careful, Brynjolf. Mercer is a Nightingale, an
         Agent of Nocturnal.

Brynjolf Then it's all true...everything I heard in the stories. The
          Nightingales, their allegiance to Nocturnal and the Twilight
          Sepulcher.

Karliah Yes. That is why we need to prepare ourselves and meet Mercer on
         equal footing. Just outside of Riften, beyond the Southeast Gate, is
         a small path cut up the mountainside. At the end of that path is a
         clearing and an old standing stone. I'd ask you both to meet me
         there.

[The player goes to the designated location, a dead end where the path has
 vanished. A gigantic stone is off to one side. The other two are waiting.]

Karliah I'm glad you're here.

Dragonborn What's the significance of this place?

Karliah This is the headquarters of the Nightingales, cut into the
         mountainside by the first of our kind. We've come to seek the edge we
         need to defeat Mercer Frey.

Dragonborn What kind of an edge?

Karliah If you'll follow me, I'll try to explain on the way.

         Tell me about the Nightingales.
         
          Gallus, Mercer Frey and I were once members of what is known as the
          Nightingale Trinity. The Trinity disbanded twenty-five years ago when
          Mercer Frey betrayed us by slaying Gallus and dumping his body in the
          ruins of Snow Veil Sanctum.

          Were they a part of the Thieves Guild?
          
           Indirectly. The Trinity is usually selected from the ranks of the
           Guild, although its existence is a closely-guarded secret.

           What is their purpose?
           
            The Nightingales protect the Temple of Nocturnal, a place known as
            the Twilight Sepulcher.

         Who is Nocturnal?
         
          She's the mistress of night and darkness and the patron of every
          thief in Tamriel.

          I've never met a thief that worshipped anything.
          
           Nocturnal isn't one for worship and reverence. There are no priests
           and no sermons, no services and no alms. She influences our luck and
           in return demands payment.

           Sounds like a Guild contract.
           
            You're closer to understanding than you realize. The only
            difference is she doesn't demand payment in the traditional sense,
            and sometimes the cost can be quite high. Whether you know it or
            not, Nocturnal dictates how well we perform as rogues.

            I have my skill, not powers or magic.
            
             Again, you have to think differently. Haven't you ever noticed how
             our luck behaves? Like a novice picking an impossible lock or a
             blind man suddenly turning to face you as you reach for his
             pocket? It's through these subtle means that Nocturnal influences
             us.

             Sounds like she just likes us to suffer.
             
              Nocturnal's whim is the greatest mystery to everyone. There have
              been volumes written on the subject. Does she exact payment when
              we die? When we suffer does she revel in our misery? No one
              knows. The return certainly seems worth the risk though.

         Am I to become a Nightingale?
         
          It's my hope that you will, yes.

         What happened to capturing Mercer alive?
         
          From the moment you were struck with my poisoned arrow at Snow Veil
          Sanctum, my path changed its course. Perhaps I couldn't bring Mercer
          back alive, but together, we were able to clear my name and to put
          Gallus's remains to rest. I'd always intended Mercer's fate to
          ultimately be decided by the Guild, and it seems they've spoken.

         This way, please.

[A rock slides back in the cliffs, revealing the hidden Nightingale Hall.]

Brynjolf So, this is Nightingale Hall. I heard about this place when I joined
          the Guild, but I never believed it existed.

Karliah The assumption that the Nightingales were just a myth was seeded
         within the Guild on purpose. It helped avert attention from our true
         nature. What's wrong, Brynjolf? I can almost hear your brow furrowing.

Brynjolf I'm trying to understand why I'm here, lass. I'm no priest, and I'm
          certainly not religious. Why pick me?

Karliah This isn't about religion, Brynjolf...it's business. This is
         Nightingale Hall. You're the first of the uninitiated to set foot
         inside in over a century. Now, if you'll both proceed to the armory
         to don your Nightingale Armor, we can begin the Oath.

Brynjolf I think we should trust the lass and take the deal.

[Each goes to one of the emblem-emblazoned stones and receives armor.]

Karliah You appear ready for the Oath.

Brynjolf Okay, lass. We've got these getups on...now what?

Karliah Beyond this gate is the first step to becoming a Nightingale.

Brynjolf Whoa there, lass. I appreciate the armor, but becoming a Nightingale?
          That was never discussed.

Karliah To hold any hope of defeating Mercer, we must have Nocturnal at our
         backs. If she is to accept you as one of her own, an arrangement must
         be struck.

Brynjolf What sort of arrangement? I need to know the terms.

Karliah The terms are quite simple, Brynjolf. Nocturnal will allow you to
         become a Nightingale and use your abilities for whatever you wish.
         And in return, both in life and death, you must serve as a guardian
         of the Twilight Sepulcher.

Brynjolf Aye, there's always a catch. But at this point, I suppose there isn't
          much to lose. If it means the end of Mercer Frey, you can count me
          in.

Karliah What about you? Are you ready to transact the Oath with Nocturnal?

         Yes, I'm ready.
         
          Good. After I open the gate, please stand on the western circle.

         I'm not sure I understand the terms.
         
          By transacting the Oath with Nocturnal, you're entering into a
          business deal. You'll be provided all the power and knowledge
          befitting a Nightingale. You're free to use those powers as you see
          fit, to further your own goals or the goals of the Thieves Guild.

          And in return?
          
           In return, you'll be required to defend the Twilight Sepulcher and
           everything within when the need arises. More importantly, upon your
           death, your spirit will be bound to the Twilight Sepulcher as one
           of its guardians.

           There's no going back?
           
            Once the Oath has been struck, the terms are binding. Knowing this,
            are you ready to undergo the ceremony?

[In the deepest chamber, each person stands on a floor glyph.]

Karliah I call upon you, Lady Nocturnal, Queen of Murk and Empress of Shadow.
         Hear my voice!

[Nocturnal manifests as a giant ball of energy.]

Nocturnal Ah, Karliah. I was wondering when I'd hear from you again. Lose
           something, did we?

Karliah My lady, I come before you to throw myself at your mercy and to accept
         responsibility for my failure.

Nocturnal You're already mine, Karliah. Your terms were struck long ago. What
           could you possibly offer me now?

Karliah I have two others that wish to transact the Oath; to serve you both in
         life and in death.

Nocturnal You surprise me, Karliah. This offer is definitely weighted in my
           favor.

Karliah My appetite for Mercer's demise exceeds my craving for wealth, Your
         Grace.

Nocturnal Revenge? How interesting... Very well, your conditions are
           acceptable. You may proceed.

Karliah Lady Nocturnal, we accept your terms. We dedicate ourselves to you as
         both your avengers and your sentinels. We will honor our agreement in
         this life and in the next until your conditions have been met.

Nocturnal Very well. I name your initiates Nightingale and I restore your
           status to the same, Karliah. And in the future, I'd suggest you
           refrain from disappointing me again.

[All three people glow with blue energy, then Nocturnal disappears.]

Karliah Now that you've transacted the Oath, it's time to reveal the final
         piece of the puzzle to you; Mercer's true crime.

Dragonborn He's done more?

Karliah Mercer was unable to unlock the Guild's vault without two keys because
         of what he stole from the Twilight Sepulcher...the Skeleton Key. By
         doing this, he's compromised our ties to Nocturnal, and in essence,
         caused our luck to run dry.

Dragonborn So the key unlocks any door?

Karliah Well, yes. But the key isn't only restricted to physical barriers. All
         of us possess untapped abilities; the potential to wield greater
         power, securely sealed within our minds. Once you realize the key can
         access these traits, the potential becomes limitless.

         The Guild should possess this item.
         
          Although it would benefit the Guild more than you could imagine, in
          the end, it would do more harm than good.

         The three of us could keep it.
         
          I'm afraid that's impossible.

         Sounds like no one should possess it.
         
          Good, then you understand why this is about more than Mercer's lust
          for power.

         If the Key isn't returned to its lock in the Twilight Sepulcher,
         things will never be the same for the Guild. As time passed on, our
         luck would diminish to the point of non-existence. And whether you
         know it or not, our uncanny luck defines our trade.

Dragonborn First time I ever set out to return something...

Karliah Very true. In our line of work, it's quite rare we set out to return
         a stolen item to its rightful owner.

Dragonborn Let's go.

Karliah Before we depart, Brynjolf has some business to discuss. I suggest you
         listen to him.

Brynjolf Listen, lad. There's one last piece of business we need to settle
          before we go after Mercer...the leadership of the Guild.

Dragonborn Why tell this to me?

Brynjolf Karliah and I had a long discussion before you arrived here. Thanks
          to your efforts, Mercer's treachery has been exposed. After we deal
          with him, all that remains is restoring the Guild to its full
          strength. As a result, we both feel that you have the potential of
          replacing Mercer as leader of the Thieves Guild.

Dragonborn Me? What about you?

Brynjolf I've been at this game a long time, my friend. A long time. I've
          stolen trinkets from nobles and framed priests for murder. I'm good
          at what I do, maybe even one of the best. But it's all I know. I've
          never been one to lead. Never desired it, never cared for it. Don't
          want it.

          I don't know what to say.
          
           Well, we have a bit of an errand to run before your coronation, so
           don't get sentimental on me now.

          It's about time you asked.
          
           Ha! Spoken like the leader of the Thieves Guild. Just don't lose
           yourself in the role. We have a bit of an errand to run before your
           coronation.

          No, it's not right.
          
           Look. Everyone in the Guild admires what you've done. Maybe they
           won't come out and simply tell you, but I promise you it's true.
           And now they know Mercer never genuinely cared about the Guild. He
           lacked the loyalty you obviously possess. I can't think of anyone
           better.

Dragonborn I accept.

Brynjolf Then it's decided. When this is all over and Delvin's contacts assure
          me we've regained our footing in Skyrim, we'll handle the details.
          Until then, we have quite the task ahead.

Dragonborn Then lets get to it.

Brynjolf I've been pouring over the plans you brought us, and I'm convinced
          the Eyes of the Falmer are in the dwarven ruins at Irkngthand.
          Karliah and I will meet you there. Prepare yourself, lad. This will
          be a fight to remember!

          Do you think we stand a chance against Mercer?
          
           If you would have asked me that yesterday, I'd have said no. But now
           I think our chances have improved. Look, call me crazy if you like,
           but I trust Karliah. I don't think she'd lead us down a suicidal
           path. Besides, I'd rather die with some of Mercers blood on my
           blade than spend my life regretting that I ran the other way.

          I guess we're Nightingales now.
          
           Aye, and some of what Karliah said is starting to make sense. Mercer
           may have damaged our reputation and raided our coffers, but this
           goes well beyond even his twisted form of larceny. Old Delvin kept
           calling it a curse and we all laughed at him. Looks like the joke's
           on us.

[If one talks to Karliah, 2 new options comes up.]

Dragonborn I don't feel stronger.

Karliah With the Skeleton Key missing from the Twilight Sepulcher, I'm afraid
         afraid Mercer's seen to it that none of us can benefit from
         Nocturnal's gifts.

Dragonborn But she spoke to us.

Karliah You merely transacted the Oath; signed the unwritten contract with
         Nocturnal. In order for us to receive our abilities...our end of the
         bargain, I'm afraid the Key must be returned.

Dragonborn Then Nocturnal's angry at us?

Karliah If Nocturnal was truly displeased with me...with any of us, she
         wouldn't have answered my call. I have no doubt that we still hold
         her favor and I believe it gives us enough of an edge to defeat
         Mercer Frey.

Dragonborn May I ever return to Nightingale Hall?

Karliah Yes. Now that you're a Nightingale, you may consider this your new
         home. You'll find that this place offers many things that will help
         you in your endeavors as well as a wealth of information for you to
         learn. Once the Skeleton Key has been restored to the Twilight
         Sepulcher, I'll make this place my home as well.

|

|

[The player reunites with the Nightingales in Irkngthand's Grand Cavern area.]

Karliah Mercer's been here...I hope we're not too late.

Dragonborn Those bandits back there...

Karliah Brynjolf and I found them like that. Mercer's doing. We have to catch
         up to him before it's too late.

Dragonborn I'm ready. Let's go.

Karliah We should tread carefully. I wouldn't be surprised if he's left behind
         a few surprises for us.

[The player can have optional convos with the other 'Gales at this point.]

Brynjolf Crime is one thing, murder is another. Mercer will answer for this.

          Do you think Mercer knows we're here?
          
           The lass seems to think old Mercer is pulling a fast one on us...
           leading us here and letting the dwarven constructs wear us down.
           I've learned to trust her lead at this point. After all, we
           Nightingales need to stick together, eh?

          What are the Eyes of the Falmer?
          
           A few years before Mercer murdered Gallus, the Guild took in a
           thief who specialized in dwarven antiquities. The thief had broken
           into a nobleman's home somewhere in Windhelm and made off with a
           small figurine of a snow elf with crystalline eyes.

           A snow elf?
           
            Aye, that's what the Falmer were known as long ago...before they
            became the blind monstrositie they are today. When Gallus took one
            look at this statue, he knew it was something special. He took it
            right up to Enthir at the College of Winterhold. Didn't take long
            for Enthir to find a book in the college's library that told of
            Irkngthand and a great statue with gemmed eyes within.

            So the Eyes of the Falmer are gems?
            
             Not just ordinary gems. They're said to be flawlessly cut and as
             big as a man's head. Can you imagine how much they're worth?
             Gallus and Mercer spent the better part of a month infiltrating
             Irkngthand, but the dwarves had protected the place far too well.
             There were just too many obstacles blocking the way. The plans
             were shelved and the rest is history.

Karliah If Mercer leaves here with the Eyes, we'll never see him again.

         Do you think Mercer knows we're here?
         
          Mercer's been careful so far. I don't think he'd just leave those
          plans behind unless he had his reasons. For someone in possession
          of the Skeleton Key, stealing the Eyes of the Falmer would be child's
          play. No, he means to ambush us down here, I'm almost certain of it.

         Both of you wait here a moment.
         
          Alright, but don't wander ahead too far or else we'll be forced to
          come find you.

         Let's go.
         
          Lead on, we're ready.

         Keep as quiet as you can. The Falmer are blind but they can still hear
         us.

[A ways ahead, through a massive barricade, they spy something creeping behind
 Falmer, killing them. It soon runs out of sight.]

Karliah Wait a moment...what's that? It's Mercer! Look...down there!

Brynjolf I'm on it, lass. Damn it! There's no way through.

Karliah He's toying with us. He wants us to follow.

Brynjolf Aye, lass...and we'll be ready for him. Let's keep moving.

[They continue a tour of the massive caverns.]

Brynjolf Look at the size of this place. Have you ever seen anything like it
          in your life, lass?

Karliah Can't say that I have. Imagine the riches hidden within these walls.

[The Nightingales find a debris-strewn room.]

Brynjolf Looks like we can take the low road or the high road across this
          chamber. Your choice.

[They reach the other side after hearing a rumbling.]

Brynjolf So this is what we heard. The entire tower collapsed.

Karliah The only reason to do that would be to block pursuit. It must be
         Mercer. We'll have to find another way around.

[They find a chamber with Falmer and a large dwarven construct.]

Brynjolf Shor' bones! Look at that monstrosity.

Karliah It's a Dwarven Centurion. Very tough and very deadly.

Brynjolf We can take the beast on or sneak around. It's your call, lad. We're
          right behind you.

[Further on...]

Karliah This is where we saw Mercer. We must be getting close.

[Everyone heads into the next section, killing more Falmer by torture devices.]

Karliah Even the Falmer don't deserve the pain these implements must have
         inflicted. The dwarves were a cruel race.

[In the next cavern]

Karliah There's a mass of the Falmer in this chamber. We can sneak through or
         take them down...I don't care. As long as we get to Mercer.

[In the shoddy tunnel beyond]

Karliah I can hear water rushing through these pipes. We must be beneath a
         lake.

[At the final door...]

Karliah He's close. I'm certain of it. We must prepare ourselves.

Brynjolf Then this is it. We do this for Gallus and for the Guild.

[They all enter the deepest chamber, where Mercer is trying to pry the gemmed
 eyes out of a massive Falmer statue.]

Karliah He's here and he hasn't seen us yet. Brynjolf, watch the door.

Brynjolf Aye, lass. Nothing's getting by me.

Karliah Climb down that ledge and see if you can--

Mercer Karliah, when will you learn you can't get the drop on me?

[He activates something, crumbling the ledge they're standing on.]

Mercer When Brynjolf brought you before me, I could feel a sudden shift in
        the wind. And at that moment, I knew it would end with one of us at
        the end of a blade.

Dragonborn Give me the Key, Mercer.

Mercer What's Karliah been filling your head with? Tales of thieves with
        honor? Oaths rife with falsehoods and broken promises? Nocturnal
        doesn't care about you, the Key or anything having to do with the
        Guild.

        I don't believe you. Nocturnal guides me.
        
         Then it appears the shadows shroud more than your presence...they
         blind your wisdom as well. Our actions have always been one and the
         same; both of us lie, cheat and steal to further our own end.

        It's not about Nocturnal. This is personal.
        
         Revenge is it? Have you learned nothing from your time with us? When
         will you open your eyes and realize how little my actions differ from
         yours? Both of us life, cheat and steal to further our own end.

        To blazes with Nocturnal. I'm here for the Eyes.
        
         Wait a moment...do I detect a hint of genuine avarice from this noble
         thief? Perhaps Karliah and Brynjolf misjudged you and your true nature
         is no different than my own.

Dragonborn The difference is I still have honor.

Mercer It's clear you'll never see the Skeleton Key as I do...as an instrument
        of limitless wealth. Instead you've chosen to fall over your own
        foolish code.

Dragonborn If anyone falls, it will be you.

Mercer Then the die is cast, and once again my blade will taste Nightingale
        blood! Karliah, I'll deal with you after I deal with your irksome
        companions. In the meantime, perhaps you and Brynjolf should get better
        acquainted.

[Mercer uses his powers to control Brynjolf, making him fight Karliah. They
 both start parrying each others attacks.]

Brynjolf What...what's happening... I can't stop myself.

Karliah Fight it, Brynjolf...he's taken control of you!

Brynjolf I'm sorry, lass, I...I can't...!

Karliah Damn you, Mercer!

Brynjolf Enough of this! Fight me!

[The player is left to fight Mercer alone, eventually dealing a coup de grace.]

Mercer Shadows take me...

[With his spell over, the other Nightingales quit fighting and try the door.]

Karliah Damn! This place is coming down! Quick, get the Skeleton Key and the
         Eye and lets¹ get out of here!

Brynjolf No luck there, lass. Something must have fallen on the other side
          of the door because it isn't moving!

Karliah We have to find another way out of here before the place fills with
         water!

[The water rapidly rises. At the last moment, part of the ceiling collapses,
 revealing an old, sealed tunnel hidden above the Falmer statue. They all
 take a breather in Bronze Water Cave]

Karliah I can't believe it's over. After twenty-five years in exile and just
         like that, it's done. All that remains is to ensure the safe return
         of the Skeleton Key.

Dragonborn Sounds like it will be a simple task.

Karliah I'm afraid it's not that simple. When the Skeleton Key was stolen from
         the Twilight Sepulcher, our access to the inner sanctum was removed.
         The only way to bring it back will be through the Pilgrim's Path.

Dragonborn I take it you never used the Pilgrim's Path.

Karliah It wasn't created for the Nightingales. It was created to test those
         who wished to serve Nocturnal in other ways. As a consequence, I have
         no knowledge of what you'll be facing.

Dragonborn Then we'd best get started.

Karliah Brynjolf is needed back at the Thieves Guild to keep order while
         you're away. And I...I can't bear to face Nocturnal after my failure
         to protect the Key. I'm afraid you'll have to face the end of your
         journey alone.

Dragonborn Don't worry. I'll return the Key.

Karliah Take this with you. I'm not certain if it will help within the walls
         of the Sepulcher, but I certainly don't need it as much as you. I've
         had this bow almost my entire life, and it's never let me down. I
         hope it brings you the same luck.

         I don't understand why you won't come with me.
         
          I've been a Nightingale for a very long time. I sold my allegiance to
          Nocturnal in exchange for many profitable years of thieving. Falling
          in love with Gallus was wrong. It was a distraction that allowed the
          Sepulcher to be desecrated and it likely cost him his life. Until
          the Key is returned, I will never set foot inside that place again.

         What's the story with the Pilgrim's Path?
         
          Even though Nocturnal doesn't desire worship in the traditional
          sense, the Twilight Sepulcher propagated a small group of priests.
          Of course, they'd never come into direct contact with Nocturnal but
          they insisted they had her favor. As part of their duties, the
          priests created all sorts of baseless rituals and ceremonies, all on
          Nocturnal's behalf.

          This didn't interfere with the Nightingales?
          
           These priests weren't¹ threat to the Skeleton Key or the conduit to
           Nocturnal's realm, so they were tolerated. One of the ceremonies
           involved the Pilgrim's Path, a so-called test of worthiness. If a
           pilgrim was able to complete the path, it was said they would live
           forever in twilight. What that means is anyone's guess.

         Tell me about the conduit inside the Sepulcher.
         
          The conduit to Nocturnal's realm, the realm of Evergloam, has been
          in Skyrim...well, longer than recorded history. The Twilight
          Sepulcher was constructed around it by man and mer in order to shield
          it from those who would exploit its power. It's through this conduit
          that we're given Nocturnal's greatest gift, our luck. What she gains
          in return is a complete mystery.

|

|

[The player journeys to the Sepulcher, tucked away in a corner of Falkreath. A
 single ghostly sentinel guards the temple steps.]

?????? I didn't recognize you, but I sense you are one of us. Who are you?

Dragonborn I'd ask the same question of you.

?????? The last of the Nightingale Sentinels, I'm afraid. I've defended the
        Sepulcher alone for what seems like an eternity.

Dragonborn The last? What happened to the rest?

?????? We were betrayed by one of our own kind. In fact, I'm to blame for
        what's happened here.

Dragonborn How are you to blame?

?????? I was blinded. Blinded by dark treachery masquerading as friendship.
        Perhaps if I had been more vigilant, then Mercer Frey wouldn't have
        lured me to my fate and stolen the Skeleton Key.

Dragonborn Wait a moment... You're Gallus!

Gallus I haven't heard that name in a long time. How do you know of me?

Dragonborn I have the Key.

Gallus The Key! You have the Skeleton Key! I never thought I'd see it again.
        And Mercer Frey?

Dragonborn Dead.

Gallus Then...it's over and my death wasn't in vain. I owe you a great deal,
        Nightingale.

        I did this for Nocturnal.
        
         That's quite a noble sentiment for someone in our...well, in your line
         of work.

        I did this to honor the Guild.
        
         You've done the Guild a great deed. And although they may not show it,
         I'm certain they appreciate your sacrifices.

        I did this to get rich.
        
         Were I able to provide it, I'd shower you in wealth for what you've
         done.

        My only regret is that you had to undertake this task alone.

Dragonborn Karliah helped me.

Gallus Karliah...she's still alive? I feared she'd befallen the same fate,
        ending up a victim of Mercer's betrayal.

Dragonborn Then take the Key and right all the wrongs.

Gallus Nothing would bring me more pride than to return the Key, but I'm
        afraid it's impossible. From the moment I arrived here, I've felt
        myself...well...dying.

Dragonborn How can a spirit die?

Gallus The Sepulcher isn't merely a temple or a vault to house the Key. Within
        these walls is the Ebonmere...a conduit to Nocturnal's realm of
        Evergloam. When Mercer stole the key, that conduit closed, severely
        limiting our ties to her. 

Dragonborn Then I'll have to proceed alone.

Gallus I'm afraid so. I'm weakening, and I can feel myself slipping away. The
        years without restoration of my power have taken their toll. Whatever
        damage has been caused can only be corrected by following the Pilgrim's
        Path to the Ebonmere and replacing the Key.

        How does the Ebonmere affect all of us?
        
         The Ebonmere is a conduit through which Nocturnal influences our
         world. Not through magic or blessings, but purely through luck.

         Luck is meaningless. What we do involves skill.
         
          Yes, absolutely. Your skill is your own...don't let anyone ever tell
          you otherwise. But Nocturnal, she influences our luck; nearly
          imperceptible assistance we get when we ply our trade.

          How's that changing the way things are?
          
           Think about the Guild...about the state it was in when you began.
           Think about all the little things you might have heard. A pick
           breaking when it shouldn't have, the clouds in the nighttime sky
           clearing at the wrong moment... Our access to those bits of luck
           are what separates us from common bandits.

           So with the Ebonmere closed, our luck's run dry?
           
            Precisely. There are still a few who call Nocturnal Lady Luck
            and for good reason.

        What will I face in the Pilgrim's Path?
        
         I wish I could help you, but I've been a prisoner in this very chamber
         for the last quarter century. The only possible help I've come across
         are the remains of some poor fellow who was trying to follow in your
         footsteps. Perhaps his journal can help?

        What's wrong with the other Nightingale Sentinels?
        
         With the Ebonmere closed, and the sudden severance from the realm of
         Evergloam, I fear they've undergone a drastic change. They're shadows
         of their former selves. They no longer remember their true purpose or
         their original identities.

         Why aren't you like them?
         
          My spirit didn't manifest itself in the Sepulcher immediately, so
          fortunately I wasn't present when the Ebonmere was sealed. However,
          ever since that day, I've felt my power waning...slowly draining
          away.

        Can't you just take the Key?
        
         Whatever is affecting the Nightingale Sentinels is starting to affect
         me too. As I get closer to the Ebonmere I begin to feel myself
         slipping away. Even right this moment, I feel strange...when I don't
         think I should be feeling anything at all.

        Good luck, Nightingale.

[The player proceeds down the Pilgrim's Path, eventually ending up in a pit.
 With the Skeleton Key's potential-drawing skill, he opens a door through the
 floor, finding the locked Ebonmere portal. The Skeleton Key, when returned,
 opens it, summoning Nocturnal to the realm.]

Nocturnal My, my. What do we have here? It's been a number of years since I've
           stepped foot on your world. Or perhaps it's been moments. One tends
           to lose track. So...once again the Key has been stolen and a
           champion returns it to the Sepulcher. Now that¹ Ebonmere has been
           restored, you stand before me awaiting your accolades; a pat on
           the head...a kiss on your cheek. What you fail to realize is your
           actions were expected and represent nothing more than the
           fulfillment of your agreement. Don't mistake my tone for
           displeasure, after all, you've obediently performed your duties to
           the letter. But we both know this has little to do with honor and
           oaths and loyalty. It's about the reward; the prize. Fear not.
           You'll have your trinkets, your desire for power, your hunger for
           wealth. I bid you to drink deeply from the Ebonmere, mortal. For
           this is where the Agent of Nocturnal is born. The Oath has been
           struck, the die has been cast and your fate awaits you in the
           Evergloam. Farewell, Nightingale. See to it the Key stays this time,
           won't you?

[Nocturnal disappears. The player goes over to Karliah.]

Karliah I'm glad you were able to bring the Key back safely. Nocturnal seemed
         quite pleased with your efforts.

Dragonborn Pleased? She sounded indifferent.

Karliah I wouldn't take that to heart. It's her way. Think of her as a
         scolding mother continually pushing you harder to be successful;
         outwardly sounding angry but silently content. I assure you, had she
         been displeased with you, we wouldn't be having this conversation.

Dragonborn What's thi about becoming an Agent of Nocturnal?

Karliah The circles at the base of the Ebonmere imbue you with powers
         befitting a Nightingale Agent. The crescent moon represents the Agent
         of Shadow, the half moon for the Agent of Subterfuge and the full moon
         for the Agent of Strife.

Dragonborn Why can't I be all three?

Karliah This is Nocturnal's way of maintaining balance. If you ever feel the
         need to change your abilities, you can return to the Sepulcher and
         step onto a different circle. Be warned that once you've chosen, you
         can't reselect for at least a day.

Dragonborn So what now?

Karliah Now, your life as a Nightingale begins. Should the need arise, you'll
         be summoned to the Sepulcher in order to defend it.

Dragonborn And you?

Karliah The Guild has welcomed me back with open arms. I feel like a void in
         my life has finally been filled. I only hope this isn't an ending to
         things, but actually the beginning.

Dragonborn The beginning of what?

Karliah Why, perhaps the greatest crime spree Skyrim's ever known. There are
         pockets brimming with coin and coffers overflowing with riches ripe
         for the picking. We may be Nightingales, but in our hearts we're still
         thieves and we're damn good at what we do.

         Tell me about the Agent of Stealth.
         
          The Agent of Stealth is the master of remaining unseen. They are able
          to manipulate the darkness and use it to their advantage. On moonlit
          nights or in darkneed rooms, this agent literally becomes invisible.

         Tell me about the Agent of Strife.
         
          This Agent of Strife can send forth a tendril of pure darkness into
          the heart of another, causing great injury to them. At the same time,
          this tether will bolster the agent's own life force, making him
          stronger.

         Tell me about the Agent of Subterfuge.
         
          The Agent of Subterfuge utilizes shadow to cloud the judgment of
          those around him. By weaving the darkness to their will, this Agent
          can manipulate others into fighting for the Nightingale for a limited
          time.

         Choose your path and your journey will be complete.

[The player picks a power. At that moment, Gallus returns to the Ebonmere.]

Gallus Karliah?

Karliah Gallus! I feared I would never see you again. I was afraid you'd
         become like the others.

Gallus If it were not for the actions of this Nightingale, your fears would
        have come true. He honors us all.

Karliah What will you do now, my love?

Gallus Nocturnal calls me to the Evergloam. My contract has been fulfilled.

Karliah Will I ever see you again?

Gallus When your debt to Nocturnal has been paid, we'll embrace once again.

Karliah Farewell, Gallus. Eyes open...walk with the shadows.

Gallus Goodbye, Karliah.

[Optionally, the player can ask more questions of Karliah now.]

Dragonborn How will I know if I'm needed here?

Karliah If this place is in danger ever again, the shadows will call. Should
         the need arise, a portal connects the Sepulcher and Nightingale Hall.
         Use it whenever you wish.

Dragonborn Where will you be from now on?

Karliah I've decided to make my home at Nightingale Hall. Since it's your home
         as well, I hope to see you and Brynjolf there. Of course, I may visit
         some of Skyrim's cities to acquire things from time to time. Can't
         afford to get rusty now, can we?

Dragonborn Where did Gallus go?

Karliah Gallus's oath has been paid. His actions have satisfied the terms. Now
         his spirit becomes one with the Evergloam...the realm of perpetual
         twilight and the cradle of shadow.

Dragonborn So, he's gone?

Karliah No, not gone...he's become one with the shadows. This is the greatest
         honor a Nightingale can hope to achieve. In death, he's become part
         of that which we use to live.

Dragonborn They're a part of the darkness around us?

Karliah Absolutely. When we say walk with the shadows, we are asking those
         Nightingales who have passed on to protect us. It's believed that they
         are literally what guides our uncanny luck...by placing their hands in
         ours. That's why the Ebonmere needed to be reopened. Without it,
         there's no way Nocturnal was able to allow them through.

|

|

[The player returns to the Guild.]

Brynjolf It's good to see you in one piece, lad! I just wanted to give you a
          proper thank you for everything you've done. The Guild is back on
          its feet again and on its way to a prosperous future. What's become
          of the Skeleton Key?

Dragonborn It's been returned to the Sepulcher.

Brynjolf That's it then. After all of those years helplessly watching the
          Guild decline. But enough of that...I'm confident that with you in
          charge, we'll soon have more gold than we could possibly spend.

Dragonborn So, where will you be now?

Brynjolf I'll be down here, trying to coordinate everything with Delvin and
          Vex; to make sure the coin keeps flowing...and no one skims! If you
          still feel like doing some jobs, I'm sure Delvin and Vex have more
          than their fair share to give out. Either way, it's been a pleasure,
          my friend. Here's to the future of the Guild. May it last another
          thousand years!

[After the speech, if the Guild is reestablished in all major cities, one is
 directed to talk to Bryn about becoming the outfit's new leader.]

Brynjolf Well, my friend...the time's come to make it official. It's time to
          become our Guild Master. Don't worry, I promise this will be short
          and sweet. If you'll just meet us in the center of the cistern room,
          we can begin.

[Karliah, Delvin, Vex and the others gather round for the coronation.]

Brynjolf Look, I've never been good at these things, so I'm just going to keep
          it short. Being Guild Master means more than just getting a cut of
          all the loot, it's about being a leader and keeping this rabble in
          order. With that in mind, I propose that the position of Guild Master
          should be yours. Delvin?

Delvin Agreed.

Brynjolf Vex?

Vex Sure, why not...

Brynjolf Karliah?

Karliah Absolutely.

Brynjolf Everyone is in agreement, so all I can do now is name you Guild
          Master and wish you good fortune and long life. Now everyone, get
          back to work.

[This officially ends the questline. Most guildies will remark on the player's
 new appointment. Only Rune, Dirge and the special job merchants don't say
 anything new. Well, technically Rune talks about the ceremony, only he wasn't
 given a line relating to it afterwards.]

Brynjolf You need anything, anything at all...don't hesitate to ask.

Delvin So now the pupil is the master, eh? Good show!

Vex I suppose you deserve it. Couldn't do any worse than Mercer anyway.

Karliah I can't think of a better person for the job, Nightingale.

Maven I suppose congratulations are in order. Now don't screw it up.

Tonilia Here's to a long and prosperous future...may the Guild last another
         hundred years.

Vipir the Fleet I am at your service.

Cynric Endell As long as you continue to make us all rich, I'm behind you.

Thrynn So, now that you're Guild Master, how about drinks for all of us!

Sapphire Well, looks like you're running the show now. Good luck.

Niruin We're all rich thanks to you. Cheers!

Garthar Glad to see they picked the right person for the job.

Ravyn Imyan I promise to live up to your expectations.

Vekel the Man I haven't seen so much celebrating in years. Mercer's dead, we
               have a new Guild Master and things are finally looking up.
               Business is booming, coin is flowing and everyone seems content
               as things keep going our way. A new chapter in the Thieves Guild
               is being written this day and we all owe it to you. Many thanks.

[If the player asks Karliah about her new dialogue options...]

Dragonborn About the secrecy of the Nightingales...

Karliah I think by now, most within the Guild are well aware of what
         transpired between Mercer Frey and ourselves. The notion that the
         Nightingales are a fictive group has long since passed. If you wish
         to wear your Nightingale Armor within the Guild, I'm certain that no
         one would give it a second thought.

Dragonborn How have things been now that Mercer's gone?

Karliah I'm feeling a sense of inner peace...something I haven't felt in a
         very long time. Instead of being clouded with thoughts of revenge and
         retribution, I feel only serenity and fulfillment. Of course, I've
         been also dabbling in my old pastimes as well. Take a look around, and
         feel free to share the fruits of my labor.

[If the player asks Brynjolf about his new dialogue options...]

Dragonborn So that's it? There's nothing else to it?

Brynjolf Well, that's it. Sorry if it isn't the ceremony you were hoping for,
          but we're not exactly known for throwing our coin around. After we're
          done here, head over to Tonilia and she'll set you up with your Guild
          Master Armor. Oh, and one last thing. Here, I want you to take this.
          It's sort of a tradition around here.

Dragonborn How's the Guild doing?

Brynjolf Take a good look around you! Have you ever seen the Guild in such a
          prosperous state? With Mercer Frey gone and our influence spreading
          across Skyrim, the Guild's earned a new level of respect it hasn't
          seen in decades. I couldn't be more proud to be part of the Thieves
          Guild, or its new Guild Master. 
  
[On one's travels, the player finds an orc slaying a vampire.]

Durak You there. The Dawnguard is looking for anyone willing to fight against
       the growing vampire menace. What do you say?

       What's the Dawnguard? 
       
        We're vampire hunters. We search out and destroy those bloodsucking
        scum wherever we find them.

       I haven't noticed any vampire menace.
       
        You're not paying attention then. Like most everyone else around here.
        Haven't you heard that the Hall of the Vigilants was destroyed by
        vampires? They never took the threat seriously, and now they've paid
        the price.

        Vigilants? Dawnguard? What are you talking about?
        
         The Vigilants mostly hunt down daedra worshippers, which is why they
         got torn to pieces when they went up against vampires. That's why our
         leader Isran is reestablishing the Dawnguard. Real, serious vampire
         hunters.

       Killing vampires? Where do I sign up?
       
        Ha. Isran's going to like you. He's up the hill in the fort. He'll
        decide if you're Dawnguard material.

       Sorry, I'm not interested.
       
        That's what everybody says, right up until they find their throat
        being ripped out by a pack of hungry vampires. If you change your mind
        and decide to join fight before it's too late, go talk to Isran up at
        the fort.

[The player seeks out Fort Dawnguard via a canyon passage east of Riften. A
 scrawny man is alongside the road nearby.]

Agmaer Oh, hey there! You here to join the Dawnguard, too? Truth is, I'm a
        little nervous. I've never done anything like this before. I hope you
        don't mind if I walk up with you. Hey, uh, don't tell Isran I was
        afraid to meet him by himself. Not the best first impression for a new
        vampire hunter, I guess. You've probably killed lots of vampires, huh?
        I'm sure Isran will sign you right up. Not sure he'll take me. I hope
        so. That must be it. Fort Dawnguard... Wow. Bigger than I expected.

[They come upon a mammoth fortification, bigger than the Palace of the Kings
 or even Dragonsreach.]

Agmaer Where is everybody? This place looks almost deserted.

[They come up to the main gate's steps.]

Agmaer I guess this is it. Wish me luck.

Celann New recruits? Hmm. Isran will decide if you've got what it takes. Go
        on, he's right inside.

[They enter the vestibule to find Isran arguing with Vigilant Tolan.]

Isran Why are you here, Tolan? The Vigilants and I were finished with each
       other a long time ago.

Tolan You know why I'm here. The Vigilants are under attack everywhere. The
       vampires are much more dangerous than we believed.

Isran And now you want to come running to safety with the Dawnguard, is that
       it? I remember Keeper Carcette telling me repeatedly that Fort Dawnguard
       is a crumbling ruin, not worth the expense and manpower to repair. And
       now that you've stirred up the vampires against you, you come begging
       for my protection?

Tolan Isran, Carcette is dead. The Hall of the Vigilants...everyone...they're
       all dead. You were right, we were wrong. Isn't that enough for you?

Isran Yes, well...I never wanted any of this to happen. I tried to warn all
       of you... I am sorry, you know.

[He notices the player's presence.]

Isran So who are you? What do you want?

       I'm here to join the Dawnguard.
       
        Got a fire in your belly to kill vampires, eh? Good for you. But look
        around -- there's really not much to join yet. I've only just started
        rebuilding the order.

       I heard you were looking for vampire hunters.
       
        You heard right. I'm glad word's finally starting to get around. But
        that means it won't be long before the vampires start to take notice
        as well.

       I was just looking around. What is this place?
       
        Why do I even post guards? This is the headquarters of the Dawnguard.
        Well, it used to be, a long time ago. As you can see, we have some work
        to do to restore it to its former glory. But maybe you want to help me
        with that?

       What can I do to help?
       
        I need someone out in the field, taking the fight to the damn vampires,
        while we're getting the fort back in shape... Tolan was telling me
        about some cave that the Vigilants were poking around in. Seemed to
        think it was more related to these recent vampire attacks.

       What's the Dawnguard?
       
        We hunt down and kill vampires. Haven't you been paying attention? In
        the old days, the Dawnguard kept all of Skyrim safe from those
        bloodsucking scum. Then people stopped taking the threat seriously,
        the Dawnguard was disbanded, and the vampires came creeping back. Now
        I'm trying to reestablish the Dawnguard. Take the fight to the vampires
        for a change. I hope it isn't too late.

       I'll have to think about it.
       
        While you're thinking about it, the vampires will be gathering strength
        in the shadows, waiting to strike.

[The player joins up.]

Isran Tolan, tell him about, what was it, Dimhollow?

Tolan Yes, that's it. Dimhollow Crypt. Brother Adalvald was sure it held some
       long-lost vampire artifact of some kind. We didn't listen to him any
       more than we did Isran. He was at the Hall when it was attacked...

Isran That's good enough for me. Go see what the vampires were looking for in
       this Dimhollow Crypt. With any luck, they'll still be there. Here, you
       should take a crossbow. Good for taking out those fiends before they
       get close. Feel free to poke around the fort and take what you need.
       There isn't much yet, but you're welcome to anything you can use.

Tolan I'll meet you at Dimhollow. It's the least I can do to avenge my fallen
       comrades.

Isran Tolan, I don't think that's a good idea. You Vigilants were never
       trained for...

Tolan I know what you think of us. You think we're soft, that we're cowards.
       You think our deaths proved our weakness. Stendarr grant that you do not
       have to face the same test and be found wanting. I'm going to Dimhollow
       Crypt. Perhaps I can be of some small assistance to you.

[He notices Agmaer nearby.]

Isran You there, boy. Stop skulking in the shadows and step up here. What's
       your name?

Agmaer I'm, uh...my name is Agmaer, sir.

Isran Do I look like a sir to you, boy? I'm not a soldier, and you're not
       joining the army.

Agmaer Yes, si...Isran.

Isran Didn't I tell you to step forward? Hmm... Farm boy, eh? What's your
       weapon?

Agmaer Uh, my weapon? I mostly just use my pa's axe, when wolves are attacking
        the goats or soemthing.

Isran My pa's axe, Stendarr preserve us. Don't worry, I think we can make a
       Dawnguard out of you. Here, take this crossbow and let's see how you
       shoot.

Agmaer Uh, crossbow? I've never...

Isran Yes, a crossbow. Best thing for killing vampires. Just take a few shots
       at those crates over there. Take a deep breath and let it out as you
       fire. You need to concentrate, boy. Try it again. You'll get the hang
       of it. That's it.

[They exit the castle.]

Celann Isran found something for you to do, eh? I thought he'd like you. Good
        luck!

|

|

[The player travels to the crypt, cut into the mountain slope near Dawnstar.
 Inside, one can hear vampires discussing something.]

Vampire These Vigilants never know when to give up. I thought we'd taught
         them enough of a lesson at their hall.

Fledgling To come in here alone...a fool like all the rest of them.

Vampire He fought well enough though. Jeron and Bresoth were no match for him.

Fledgling Ha. Those two deserved what they got. Their arrogance had become
           insufferable.

Vampire All this talk is making me thirsty. Perhaps another Vigilant will
         wander in soon.

Fledgling I wish Lokil would hurry it up. I have half a mind to return to the
           castle and tell Harkon what a fool he's entrusted this mission to.

Vampire And I have half a mind to tell Lokil of your disloyalty.

Fledgling You wouldn't dare. Now shut up and keep on watch.

[After slaying the fiends, one finds that Tolan, who had arrived first, was
 dead at their feet. The journey continues, eventually leading to a large,
 watery chamber where a kidnapped Vigilant is being interrogated by Lokil.]

Adalvald I'll never tell you anything. My oath to Stendarr is stronger than
          any suffering you can inflict on me.

Lokil I believe you, Vigilant. And I don't think you even know what you've
       found here. So go and meet your beloved Stendarr.

[He cuts down the hostage.]

Vampire Are you sure that was wise, Lokil? He still might have told us
         something. We haven't gotten anywhere ourselves with...

Lokil He knew nothing. He served his purpose by leading us to this place. Now
       it is up to us to bring Harkon the prize. And we will not return without
       it. Vingalmo and Orthjolf will make way for me after this.

Vampire Yes, of course Lokil. Do not forget who brought you news of the
         Vigilants' discovery.

Lokil I never forget who my friends are. Or my enemies.

[He soon forgets everything, as the player kills all the evil vampires. Using
 the central pedestal and the sliding braziers, the puzzle of the artifact is
 solved, revealing...a cute girl inside a coffin-like chamber?!]

Serana Unh...where is...who sent you here?

        Who were you expecting?
        
         • I was expecting someone...like me, at least.
         • I was expecting someone from my family. I don't recognize you. Are
           you one of my father's little acolytes?

           Who's your father?²
           
            He's a very powerful man. Or he was at one point. I'm surprised
            another vampire hasn't heard of him.

        No, a group called the Dawnguard sent me here.²
        
         That's not a name I know. And it doesn't sound like a name a group
         of vampires would choose.

        A man named Isran.
        
         I...I don't know who that is. Is he...like me?

        That's not your concern.
        
         I think it is, actually. Why would someone who isn't...like me...come
         all the way down here?

        What do you mean, like you?
        
         A...can't you tell just from looking at me? A vampire.

        Are you a...
        
         Vampire, yes.

        How did you know I was a vampire?²
        
         You think I can't tell my own kind? I smelled you almost before my
         eyes were open.

        You're a vampire?²
        
         Can't you tell your own kind? I smelled you almost before my eyes were
         open.

        The Dawnguard would want me to kill you.
        
         • Not fond of vampires, are they? Well look. Kill me, you've killed
           one vampire. But if people are after me, there's something bigger
           going on. I can help you find out what that is.

         • Don't think that'll keep them from turning on you eventually.
           They'll figure out what you are.

        Why were you locked away like this?
        
         That's...complicated. And I'm not totally sure if I can trust you.
         But if you want to know the whole story, help me get back to my
         family's home.

        Where do you need to go?
        
         

        As long as you don't get in my way.
        
         I was going to say the same thing to you.

        My family used to live on an island to the west of Solitude. I would
        guess they still do. By the way...my name is Serana. Good to meet you.

[One can inquire further about her circumstances.]

Dragonborn Any idea how to get out of here?

Serana Your guess is as good as mine. This place looks pretty different from
        when I was locked away.

Dragonborn Is that an Elder Scroll?

Serana Yes, it is, and it's mine.

        Why do you have an Elder Scroll?
        
         It's...complicated. I can't really talk about it. I'm sorry.

        Is it fragile? Do we need to be careful with it?
        
         Ha. Nothing can destroy an Elder Scroll. Worry more about protecting
         your hide, and let me worry about my things.

Dragonborn How long were you in there?

Serana Good question. Hard to say. I...I can't really tell. I feel like it
        was a long time. Who is Skyrim's High King?

        That's actually a matter for debate.
        
         Oh, wonderful. A war of succession. Good to know the world didn't get
         boring while I was gone. Who are the contenders?

        Ulfric Stormcloak is the true High King.
        
         I've...never heard of him. Is he well supported?

        Elisif of Solitude will be High Queen.
        
         I don't know that name. You say she's Jarl of Solitude? Who supports
         her?

Dragonborn The Empire supports Elisif, but there are many in Skyrim loyal to
            Ulfric.

Serana Empire? What...what empire?

Dragonborn The...Empire. From Cyrodiil.

Serana Cyrodiil is the seat of an empire? I must have been gone longer than I
        thought. Definitely longer than we planned. Please, let's hurry. I need
        to get home so I can figure out what's happened.

Dragonborn Why were you locked away?

Serana I'd...rather not get into that with you. If that's all right. I'm
        sorry, it's not that...it's just that I don't know who I can trust
        just yet. Let's get to my home, and I'll have a better sense of where
        we all stand.

Dragonborn Tell me about your home.

Serana It's on an island near Solitude. Hopefully we can find a boat to take
        us there. It's my family home. Not the most welcoming place, but
        depending on who's around, I'll be safe there.

        Why wouldn't you be safe there?
        
         Let's just say that my mother and father had a bit of a falling out.
         Don't worry, I'm not in any danger or anything like that. It'll just
         be more unpleasant to run into my father.

        Someone you don't want to see?
        
         My father and I don't really get along. Ugh, saying it out loud makes
         it sound so...common. Little girl who doesn't get along with her
         father. Read that story a hundred times.

Dragonborn Wait here.

Serana I'll hang back a bit, but you're not leaving me behind. This is too
        important.
Serana Sorry, I'm not that easy to get rid of. If you want to run ahead, I
        won't stop you, but I'll be following.
Serana If you think I'm going to let you have all the fun, you're crazy. I'll
        let you lead ahead, but I'll be keeping an eye on you.

Dragonborn Come with me.

Serana Let's go.
Serana Thought you'd never ask.
Serana Whenever you're ready.

Dragonborn I need to trade some things with you.

Serana Hands to yourself.
Serana Not going to happen.
Serana Why don't you keep your things, and I'll keep mine.

Dragonborn I think we should part ways.

Serana I disagree.
Serana You can't get rid of me that easily.
Serana And go where? You can't just leave me alone whenever you feel like it.
        I'm coming with you, like it or not.

|

|

[Discussion over, it's time to find the exit.]

Serana This feels like the right way. I was starting to worry. Does the air
        feel...heavy down here? I'm a little woozy, but it might just be from
        waking up.

[They finally escape the musty cavern.]

Serana Ah, it's so good to breathe again! Even in this weather, it's better
        than the cave.

[If one travels to Fort Dawnguard before doing anything else...]

Serana I don't like the feel of this place. I'll wait for you back by the
        entrance.

[If one talk with Isran before continuing on with Serana...]

Isran So, any luck? Was Tolan right about the vampires being interested in
       Dimhollow Crypt?

       Yes, the place was crawling with vampires.
       
        Good. I assume you took care of that little infestation. Did you figure
        out what they were looking for in there?

       Tolan was right. And he's dead. The vampires killed him.
       
        Damn fool. I told him not to go. The Vigilants always had more bravery
        than sense. Did you at least find out what the vampires were looking
        for in there?

Dragonborn It seems they were looking for a woman who was sealed in the crypt.

Isran That doesn't make much sense. Where is this woman? Who is she?

       I don't know who she is. She says she lives in a castle near Solitude.
       
        (skip to Well I don't know...)

       She didn't want to follow me here. But she wants me to take her home.
       
        Home? Where's that?

        She says she lives in a castle near Solitude.
        
         Well I don't know what that means. But we need to find out. She must
         either have something the vampires want, or be someone important to
         them.

       I'm pretty sure she's a vampire, actually.
       
        That would fit with the rest of it... I don't like it, but you did
        right to play along. We need to find out what this is all about.

       I won't lie -- if this were any other situation, I'd put her down just
       on the chance she might be a vampire. But this is something different.
       I'd say do what she wants. Take her home, and see who else is in this
       castle.

[On the NW coast of Skyrim, they find a small dock. An island castle looms on
 the northern horizon.]

Serana That's it, out there to the north. We used to keep a boat around here
        to get there and back.

[With the boat in working order, they row to Castle Volkihar.]

Dragonborn So this is your home?

Serana This is it. Home sweet...castle.

        Why didn't you tell me it was so huge?
        
         I didn't want you to think I was one of those...you know, the women
         who just sit in their castle all day? I don't know. Coming from a
         place like this, well...it's not really me. I hope you can believe
         that.

        It's impressive.
        
         It's something all right.

[They approach the locked front gate.]

Serana Hey, so...before we go in there...

        What is it?
        
         I wanted to thank you for getting me this far. But after we get in
         there, I'm going to go my own way for a while. I think... I know your
         friends would probably want to kill everything in there. I'm hoping
         you can show some more control than that. Once we're inside, just
         keep quiet for a bit. Let me take the lead.

        Are you all right?
        
         I think so. And thanks for asking. (repeats I wanted to thank...)

        What is it now?
        
         Fine, don't worry about it. When we get in, you won't have to babysit
         about¹ me any more.

Watchman Lady Serana's back! Open the gate!

[They enter the vampire clan's keep. A gruesome feast is going on.]

Vingalmo How dare you trespass here! Wait...Serana? Is that truly you? I
          cannot believe my eyes! My lord! Everyone! Serana has returned!

Serana I guess I'm expected

Lord Harkon I can't believe it.

[They go down to the dining room.]

Harkon My long-lost daughter returns at last. I trust you have my Elder
        Scroll?

Serana After all these years, that's the first thing you ask me? Yes, I have
        the scroll.

Harkon Of course I'm delighted to see you, my daughter. Must I really say the
        words aloud? Ah, if only your traitor mother were here, I would let her
        watch this reunion before putting her head on a spike. Now tell me, who
        is this stranger you have brought into our hall?

Serana This is my savior, the one who freed me.

Harkon For my daughter's safe return, you have my gratitude. Tell me, what is
        your name?

        I'm (name). Who are you?
        
         

        You first.
        
         Very well.

        I am Harkon, lord of this court. By now, my daughter will have told you
        what we are.

        You're vampires.
        
         Not just vampires. We are among the oldest and most powerful vampires
         in Skyrim.

        You're a reclusive cannibal cult.
        
         Not quite, though I can see how an outsider might arrive at that
         conclusion. No, we are vampires, among the oldest and most powerful
         in Skyrim.

        I don't really care what you are.
        
         Perhaps you should. I count some of the oldest and most powerful
         vampires in Skyrim among the members of my court.

        For centuries we lived here, far from the cares of the world. All that
        ended when my wife betrayed me and stole away that which I valued most.

        Do I get a reward for finding your daughter?
        
         I was about to suggest that very thing. Yes, you most certainly
         deserve a reward.

        What happens now?
        
         You have done me a great service, and now you must be rewarded.

        There is but one gift I can give that is equal in value to the Elder
        Scroll and my daughter. I offer you my blood. Take it, and you will
        walk as a lion among sheep. Men will tremble at your approach, and you
        will never fear death again.

        And if I refuse your gift?
        
         Then you will be prey, like all mortals. I will spare your life this
         once, but you will be banished from this hall.

        I'm already a vampire. What more can you offer me?²
        
         You contracted a disease, perhaps, but you are no true vampire.
         Accept my gift and I promise that you will learn the difference.
         Refuse me, and I will banish you from this castle. I will spare your
         life this once, but after that, you are prey.

        I'm a werewolf. What will happen if I accept your gift?²
        
         Yes, I can smell it on you. The power of my blood will purge that
         filth and make you whole again.

        And if I want to remain a werewolf?²
        
         I will banish you from this castle. I will spare your life this once,
         but after that, you are prey.

        Perhaps you still need convincing? Behold the power!

[He morphs into a demonic-looking vampire.]

Harkon This is the power that I offer! Now, make your choice!

        I will accept your gift and become a vampire.
        
         Be still!

        I don't want to become a vampire. I refuse your gift.
        
         So be it! You are prey, like all mortals. I banish you!

[If the player accepts, Harkon bites the player's neck and is lead to a back
 room with a blood fountain in it.]

Harkon Awake at last, good. The power is growing within you, and now you must
        learn to wield it.

        I'm ready to learn about my new powers.
        
         With my guidance you will become a deadly instrument, striking terror
         into the hearts of mortals wherever you tread. Now, listen to my words
         and do as I instruct. The true power of the ancient blood is found in
         the form of the Vampire Lord. Assume the mantle of the Vampire Lord,
         and we will continue.

        What happened? How did I get here?
        
         My blood is potent. At first, the body is overwhelmed by it. After my
         bite, you collapsed and felt into a slumber. Now your flesh has
         acclimated to the new blood that courses through your veins. I assure
         you, no harm was done. In truth, your strength surprises me. Not all
         mortals can withstand my embrace.

        What is this place?
        
         A shrine to Molag Bal, the mighty Daedra Prince who is father to all
         our kind. Our power is a blessing from him. It is he who first
         bestowed the power of the ancient blood upon me.

         You made a pact with Molag Bal?
         
          In an age long forgotten to history, I ruled as a mighty king. My
          domain was vast, my riches endless and my power infinite. And yet,
          as my mortal life neared an end, I faced a seemingly invincible
          enemy -- my own mortality. I pledged myself to Molag Bal, and in his
          name I sacrificed a thousand innocents. In reward, he gave
          everlasting life to myself, my wife and my daughter. And so I have
          defeated mortality itself.

[The player shapeshifts into the Vamp Lord.]

Harkon In this form, you can drain the life from your foes with your right
        hand. With your left hand, you can wield the power of blood magic to
        raise the dead. You can also call upon the powers of night to turn into
        a swarm of bats and reappear some distance away. Should you run out of
        magicka, you can descend to the ground and fight as the beasts do. Do
        so now and we will continue.

[The player stops floating.]

Harkon Good. You are weaker while on the ground, because you cannot access the
        blood magic. However, the night powers are still yours to command, and
        your claws are still formidable weapons. Over time, your powers will
        grow in strength and you will find new ways to use your gifts. There
        is much to learn, but if you master the powers of the Vampire Lord,
        few enemies will be able to stand against you. There is one last thing
        you must know. Slaying mortal men with your life drain grants you new
        night powers and blood magic. I keep a stable of thralls in the castle
        should you need to feed like the baser vampires to stave off the sun.
        That is all I have to teach you. If you wish to be reminded of these
        lessons, you need only ask. I have a task that will test your new
        powers, but first, do you have any questions?

        I'm ready to carry out this task.
        
         Good. Go and speak to Garan Marethi. Tell him it is time. He will
         understand.

        What must I know about being a vampire?
        
         As a vampire, you will gain new powers, but also a weakness to
         sunlight. With each passing day that you do not feed, that weakness
         will become more deadly, but your powers will also become stronger.
         Feed upon those who are sleeping, and your vulnerability to sunlight
         will diminish along with your powers.

        Tell me again about being a Vampire Lord.
        
         When you first transform into a Vampire Lord, you will hover in the
         air. While you do, you will command the powers of Blood and Night.
         Descend to the ground, and you can attack with your claws and feed
         upon your prey to regain your strength. With experience, your powers
         will grow and you will discover new ways to use them.

|
[DW4a] A NEW ORDER |===========================================================
|

[If one refuses Harkon's gift, the come to outside. With nothing left to do,
 one must report to the Dawnguard. The vampire hunters are fighting prey on
 their doorstep.]

Isran Look at this. I should have known it was only a matter of time before
       they found us. It's the price we pay for openly recruiting. We'll have
       to step up our defenses. I don't suppose you have some good news for me.

       Not exactly.
       
        Damn. Well what do you know?

       I have news, but I wouldn't call it good.
       
        Of course. Why did I suppose differently. Fine, tell me what you know.

       The woman was a vampire, and they wanted her back.²
       
        And so we delivered her right to them. I should've kept her here until
        we were certain...

       The vampires were looking for a woman trapped in Dimhollow.²
       
        A woman? Trapped in there? That doesn't make any sense. Who is she?
        More importantly, where is she?

        She wanted to go home, so I took her to her castle.
        
         I'm waiting to hear what any of this means.

        She's the daughter of a powerful vampire lord.
        
         And so you delivered her to them.

Dragonborn They also have an Elder Scroll.

Isran They what? And you didn't stop them? You didn't secure the scroll?

       I'm lucky I made it out alive.
       
        Right. So they have this woman, and an Elder Scroll.

       There were too many of them, and only one of me.
       
        So they have everything they wanted, and we're left with nothing.

       I never got the chance.
       
        I suppose you're lucky you're not dead. Or worse, one of them.

       By the Divines, this couldn't get much worse. This is more than you and
       I can handle.

       So you're just going to give up?
       
        When did I say that? We just need...we need help.

       We have to do something.
       
        Well of course we do. I'm old, not stupid. We're just going to need
        some help. 

       If they're bold enough to attack us here, then this may be bigger than I
       thought. I have good men here, but... There are people I've met and
       worked with over the years. We need their skill, their talents, if we're
       going to survive this. If you can find them, we might have a chance.

Dragonborn Where can I find the people we need?

Isran Right to the point, aren't you. I like that. Not like those fools in
       the order. We should keep it small. Too many people, and we'll draw
       unwanted attention to ourselves. I think we'll want Sorine Jurard.
       Breton girl, whip-smart and good with tinkering. Fascination with the
       Dwemer. Weapons in particular. Last I knew, she was out in the Reach,
       convinced she was about to find the biggest dwarven ruins yet.

Dragonborn She'll help us?

Isran Might need a little convincing first, but she should. You'll also want
       to find Gunmar. Big brute of a Nord, hates vampires almost as much as I
       do. Got into his head years back that his experience with animals would
       help. Trolls in particular, from what I hear. Last I knew he was out
       scouring Skyrim for more beasts to tame. Bring the two of them back
       here, and we can get started on coming up with a plan. Watch your back.

[Gunmar is located near Ivarstead, tracking his prey.]

Gunmar • You there, hold fast! I've tracked this damned bear for two weeks;
          I'll not let it have any more victims.

        • For two weeks I've tracked that bear, and now find that you've killed
          it on your own. I'm not sure whether that makes you brave or foolish.
          What brings you here?

Dragonborn Isran needs your help.

Gunmar Isran? Needing someone else's help? Never thought I'd hear that. I'm
        afraid he's a few years too late. I've moved on. I have more important
        business to attend to. Besides, he can handle anything alone! He
        assured me so himself. What could he possibly need my help with?

Dragonborn We're up against vampires.

Gunmar Vampires? That...well, that might change things. Tell me more about
        what's going on.

Dragonborn We're not sure, but they have an Elder Scroll.

Gunmar By the Eight...

        • All right, look. I'll consider it, but I just can't leave this bear
          to prey on more innocent people. Once it's dealt with, then perhaps
          I'll see what Isran expects of me.

        • All right. I'll hear out Isran, see if there's anything I can do to
          help. Where do you expect me to go?

          Dragonborn Isran's at Fort Dawnguard.

          He's been working on that place for years now. Never lets anyone in.
          His own little fortress. Well, I guess I'll get to see what he's been
          up to all this time. I'll meet you there.

[They slay the bear.]

Gunmar Don't know how well I'd have managed by myself. You have my thanks.
        You've helped me, so I suppose the least I can do is find out what
        Isran wants. He's still at that fort near Stendarr's Beacon, I assume?

        Yes, he said to meet him at Fort Dawnguard.
        
         Of course he did.

        How did you know?
        
         If Isran is anything, he's stubborn.

        He's been working on that place for years now. Never lets anyone in.
        His own little fortress. Well, I guess I'll get to see what he's been
        up to all this time. I'll meet you there.

[Sorine Jurard is found in the Reach's wilderness.]

Sorine You haven't seen a sack of dwarven gyros lying around, have you? I'd
        swear I left it right here. Do you think mudcrabs might've taken it?
        I saw one the other day... Wouldn't be surprised if it followed me
        here. Just look around, will you?

Dragonborn Isran asked me to find you.

Sorine Isran? Wants me? No, you must be mistaken. He made it exceedingly clear
        the last time we spoke that he had no interest in my help. I find it
        hard to believe he changed his mind. He said some very hurtful things
        to me before I left. Anyway, I'm quite happy with my current pursuits.
        So if you'll excuse me...

        You had a falling out?
        
         Yes, that was my point. I felt it was rather clear. Look, what is it
         you want from me?

        Vampires threaten all of Skyrim. We need your help.
        
         Vampires? Really? Oh, and I suppose now he remembers that I proposed
         no less than three different scenarios that involved vampires
         overrunning the population. Well, what are they up to?

        They have an Elder Scroll.
        
         I... Well, that's actually something I never would've anticipated.
         Interesting. I'm not sure what they would want with one, but in this
         case Isran is probably correct in thinking it isn't good.

        We're not sure, but Isran is concerned.
        
         In case you haven't noticed, Isran is always concerned about
         something. That's what got us working together in the first place.
         Still, if he sent you to find me, it may actually be pretty bad.

        All right. If nothing else, I suppose it wouldn't hurt to learn more
        about what's going on so I can better defend myself. But I'm not just
        going to abandon what I've been working on here. It's too useful. I
        need at least one intact dwarven gyro. So either I need to find the
        satchel those mudcrabs stole, or I need another gyro from someplace.
        You wouldn't happen to have one, would you?

        There's no time. You need to get moving now. (Persuade)
        
         • Fine, fine! I can't afford to forget about this work, though. Some
           very interesting applications. Now where is it I'm supposed to be
           going?

         • I'm sorry, but I'm not about to do that without at least a single
           gyro to show for my efforts.

        Here, I've got a dwarven gyro. Take it.²
        
         Thank you! It's not much, but this will help a great deal with some
         things I've been researching. Now where is it I'm supposed to be
         going?

        I don't have any gyros on me.
        
         Well then I'm very sorry, but I just can't walk away from this project
         yet.

Dragonborn We're meeting at Fort Dawnguard.

Sorine Ah. Been working more on his secret hideout, has he? It'll be
        interesting to see how much progress he's made. I'll finish up here and
        head in that direction soon as I can. See you there.

[With the two helpers recruited, it's time to report to Isran. The player
 arrives just in time to see them arrive. Isran raises inner gates, forcing
 them to stand in the main entry.]

Gunmar All right Isran, you've got us all here. Now what do you want?

Isran Hold it right there.

[A bright light erupts from the center.]

Sorine What are you doing?

Isran Making sure you're not vampires. Can't be too careful.

[He shuts the magical light off.]

Isran So, welcome to Fort Dawnguard. I'm sure you've heard a bit of what we're
       up against. Powerful vampires, unlike anything we've seen before. And
       they have an Elder Scroll. If anyone is going to stand in their way,
       it's going to be us.

Sorine This is all well and good, but do we actually know anything about what
        they're doing? What do we do now?

Isran We'll get to that. For now, get acquainted with the space. Sorine,
       you'll find room to start your tinkering on that crossbow design you've
       been working on. Gunmar, there's an area large enough for you to pen up
       some trolls, get them armored up and ready to use.

[He looks at the player.]

Isran In the meantime, we're going to get to the bottom of why a vampire
       showed up here looking for you. Let's go have a little chat with it,
       shall we?

|
[DW4b] THE BLOODSTONE CHALICE |================================================
|

[One visits Merethi as Harkon instructed.]

Dragonborn I have a message from Harkon.

Garan Lord Harkon. Remember your place. Now, what is our Lord's wish?

Dragonborn He simply said It is time.

Garan Well, well. He wants the Chalice, then. You've heard of the Bloodstone
       Chalice?

       I've never heard of it.
       
        It is a rather well-kept secret.

       Of course. Hasn't everyone?
       
        No. Don't try and impress me. It only leaves you looking foolish.

       The Chalice has been in Lord Harkon's possession for quite some time
       now. It is, when used properly, able to increase the potency of our
       powers. He has neglected using it for ages. If he wants it filled now,
       then grander things are afoot. This is good. Follow me. I'll take you
       to it.

[They start walking to the dining room.]

Garan Lord Harkon has never cared to use the Chalice, relying on his more than
       adequate powers until now. This is an intriguing change.

[They arrive.]

Garan Excuse us. I need to fetch the Bloodstone Chalice.

Vingalmo The Chalice? Why?

Orthjolf What are you up to, Garan?

Garan Lord Harkon's orders, Orthjolf. Calm yourself. Our friend here has been
       ordered to fill the Chalice.

Vingalmo Really?

Garan Indeed. He's off to Redwater Den.

Orthjolf Well, then... Best of luck to you.

Garan Vingalmo and Orthjolf are Harkon's primary advisors. I'm sure they're
       quite surprised to learn that you're taking the Chalice. And here we
       are.

[They find a large chalice on a small pedestal.]

Garan Now, this Chalice needs to be filled directly from the bloodspring
       that is the source of Redwater Den. But that's not enough. Once that's
       done, the blood of a powerful vampire needs to be added to it. Keep in
       mind that Redwater Den has fallen into...well, let's just say less
       reputable members of society now dwell there. It's your choice whether
       to attempt to deal with them or force your way through. Hurry back. You
       don't want to keep Lord Harkon waiting.

[The player travels to Redwater Den, near Riften's Lake Honrich. The place is
 a vampire-run skooma distillery, apparently meant to create addicts that can
 be preyed upon.]

Doorman Hold it. If you're going downstairs, you keep your weapons to yourself
         or we'll be getting better acquainted. Head on in and behave yourself.

[One way or another, one enters the back caverns and finds Redwater's spring.
 The overhear vampires talking nearby.]

Thrall So why don't you just drink the blood from the spring? I mean, that
        seems easier than running a skooma den...

Vampire The boss said it's some sort of profaned spring. It looks like blood,
         but it's not the real thing. Drinking it gives you strength, but it
         also gets you pretty messed up... That's why we thought of putting it
         in the skooma.

[After cutting through an entire den, the spring's source is uncovered. One
 fills the chalice. Two Volkihar vampires show themselves.]

Salonia Caelia It's really too bad, you know. The little accident you had
                here, completely unexpected...

Stalf Yeah, too bad. Lord Harkon's new favorite, dead so soon after joining
       the family.

Salonia We're just lucky I was here to return the Chalice to Vingalmo, so he
         could make sure Harkon gets it back.

Stalf Wait, what? That's not what we agreed. We take it back together.

Salonia Idiot. You didn't really think I'd let you walk out of here either,
         did you? Vingalmo wants you both dead.

Stalf Well, that's just fine. Orthjolf told me to finish off anyone who got
       in the way.

[The Dragonborn slays both traitorous vampires, then returns to Marethi.]

Garan I see you have returned. Lord Harkon will be pleased. You met Stalf and
       Salonia, I assume? Lord Harkon and I suspected they might follow you
       there.

       They tried to kill me!
       
        Well of course they did.

       I killed them both.
       
        As well you should have.

       Welcome to the politics of Lord Harkon's court. Vingalmo and Orthjolf
       both long for our Lord's throne, but cannot make overt moves against
       him. Each sought to gain power by using his underling to kill you and
       keep the Chalice for himself. By ensuring the Chalice reaches our Lord,
       you have increased his power over them, and at the same time deprived
       them of their little pets. You've done Lord Harkon two great services.
       Take what you've learned to heart, and be careful who you trust. Now, I
       believe Lord Harkon wishes to speak with you.

|
[DW5a] PROPHET |===============================================================
|

[The player goes with Isran to the balcony rooms, finding Serana there.]

Isran This vampire showed up while you were away. I'm guessing it's the one
       you found in Dimhollow Crypt. Says it's got something really important
       to say to you. So let's hear it.

Serana You probably weren't expecting to see me again.

Dragonborn What are you doing here?

Serana I'd rather not be here either, but I needed to talk to you. It's
        important, so please just listen before your friend, here, loses his
        patience. It's...well, it's about me. And the Elder Scroll that was
        buried with me.

        What about the scroll?
        
         The reason I had it...and why I was down there. It all comes back to
         my father.

        What about you?
        
         The reason I was down there...and why I had the Elder Scroll. It all
         comes back to my father.

        I'm guessing you figured this part out already, but my father's not
        exactly a good person. Even by vampire standards. He wasn't always like
        that, though. There was...a turn. He stumbled onto this obscure
        prophecy and just kind of lost himself in it.

        What sort of prophecy?
        
         It's pointless and vague, like all prophecies. The part he latched
         onto said that vampires would no longer need to fear the sun. That's
         what he's after. He wants to control the sun, have vampires control
         the world.

        What do you mean...lost himself?
        
         He just became absorbed...obsessed. It was kind of sick, actually.
         The prophecy said that vampires would no longer need to fear the sun.
         For someone who fancied himself as vampire royalty, that's pretty
         seductive.

        Anyway, my mother and I didn't feel like inviting a war with all of
        Tamriel, so we tried to stop him. That's why I was sealed away with the
        Scroll.

        What's all this have to do with the Dawnguard?
        
         I'm sorry, I had heard there were vampire hunters here. I thought
         they might want to know about a vampire plot to enslave the rest of
         the world. Was I wrong?

        You took a big risk coming here.
        
         I did. But something about you makes me think I can trust you. I hope
         I'm not wrong.

        No, you're right. We just have to convince the others you're on our
        side. |
        
         Well, let's move then. I'm nothing if not persuasive.

        You want us to help you?
        
         That was the plan, yes. Assuming the rest of them can trust a vampire.
         Come on, I'll need you to help convince them.

Isran All right, you've heard what it has to say. Now tell me, is there any
       reason I shouldn't kill this bloodsucking fiend right now?

       Because we're going to need her help.
       
        Why, because of that story about the prophecy? About some vampire
        trying to put the sun out? Do you actually believe any of that?

        Why else would she risk her life to come here?
        
         Who knows, maybe it has a death wish. Maybe it's just insane. I don't
         really care.

       Set your hatred aside and try to see the larger picture, Isran.
       
        Set my hatred aside? Not a chance. It's what keeps me strong.

        You don't trust her, fine. Trust me. I believe here.
        
         You'd better know what you're doing.

       It can stay for now, but if it so much as lays a finger on anyone here,
       I'll hold you responsible. Got it?

[He turns to Serana.]

Isran You hear me? Don't feel like a guest, because you're not. You're a
       resource. You're an asset. In the meantime, don't make me regret my
       sudden outburst of tolerance and generosity, because if you do, your
       friend here is going to pay for it.

Serana Thank you for your kindness. I'll remember it the next time I'm feeling
        hungry. So, in case you didn't notice the giant thing I have on my
        back, I have the Elder Scroll with me. Whatever it says, it will have
        something that can help us. But of course, neither of us can read it.

Dragonborn Who can?

Serana Well, the Moth Priests are the only ones I've heard who can do it. They
        spend years preparing before they start reading, though. Not that it
        helps us, anyway, because they're half a continent away in Cyrodiil.

Isran Some Imperial scholar arrived in Skyrim a few days ago. I was staking
       out the road when I saw him pass by. Maybe that's your Moth Priest.

Serana Do you know where he's staying now?

Isran No, and I'm not going to waste men looking. We're fighting a war against
       your kind, and I intend to win it. You want to find him, try talking to
       anyone who'd meet a traveler. Innkeepers and carriage drivers in the big
       cities maybe. But you're on your own.

Serana Any idea on how you're going to find a Moth Priest? Skyrim's a pretty
        big place.

        Do you have any ideas?
        Where would a Moth Priest actually go?
        
         Well, back before I...you know. The College of Winterhold was the
         first place I'd think to go for any kind of magic or historical thing.
         The wizards know about all kinds of things that people probably
         shouldn't know about.

         • Actually, now that I think of it...I'm going to come along with you.
           I've been really wanting to get out and explore a bit.

         • I'd...well, I'd come with you, but I don't know if I can trust your
           friend. Let me know if you want me along.

[There are many ways to find leads, such as those Harkon suggested. The most
 appropriate might be Serana's suggestion of the College, though, where one
 can ask the librarian.]

Dragonborn I need to find a Moth Priest.

Urag gro-Shub A Moth Priest? What in Oblivion do you want a Moth Priest for?

Dragonborn My business is my own. Just tell me what I need to know.

Urag Fine, fine. No need to get your breeches in a twist. The obvious answer
      is to go to the Imperial City. The Moth Priests make their home in the
      White Gold Tower. Sometimes they go out looking for Elder Scrolls. Lucky
      for you, there's a Moth Priest in Skyrim right now, doing just that. He
      stopped in to do some research in the library, then left for Dragon
      Bridge. If you hurry, you might catch him there.

[If one asks a carriage driver instead, they will all give the same answer]

Dragonborn Have you seen a Moth Priest?

Driver That's one of them Imperial scholars, right? Old man with a gray robe?

Dragonborn That's right. You've seen him?

Driver Might be that I have, but I can't say for sure. I got enough troubles
        on my mind just tryin' to scrape by out here.

        Please, it's very important that I find him. (Persuade)
        
         • Now that I think on it, I did see your priest. He tried to hire me
           for a trip to Dragon Bridge, but I told him that ain't one of my
           stops.

         • Can't help you, friend. I might remember better if my pockets
           weren't so light.

        
         • Ah yes, I remember your Moth Priest now. He wanted me to take him
           out to Dragon Bridge, but I told him it ain't one of my stops.

         • An' maybe it won't.

        Never mind, I'll look somewhere else.
        
         Suits me just fine.

[Some innkeepers may not be able to give information. Others, like Hulda in
 Whiterun or Corpulus Vinius in Solitude, will; they have the same dialogue
 as below.]

Dragonborn Heard anything about a moth priest passing through?

Corpulus Have I heard anything? It was the talk of the city for three days
          straight. Ain't too often we get a visitor like that.

Dragonborn Where is he now?

Corpulus Oh, he just left a short while ago. He said he'd finished up his
          work and it was time to move on. That's all I can tell you. He asked
          me not to let anyone know where he was going. I suppose he didn't
          want the attention.

          It's important that I find him right away. (Persuade)
          
           • Ah, well, in that case, I'll tell you what I know. He took the
             road southwest out of town, and he said he was going to be
             crossing over the Dragon Bridge. That's all he told me. I hope it
             helps.

           • It's like I said, I'm not going to talk about it.

          
           • I can see that. He said he was heading for Dragon Bridge next. I
             hope that helps you.

           • Sorry, but that Moth Priest's comings and goings are none of my
             business, and none of yours either.

          I'll try my luck elsewhere.
          
           Never much cared for folks who can't mind their own business.

[With the info found, one heads to Dragon Bridge. Across the titular landmark,
 one finds a waylaid cart and corpses, one of which contains a note mentioning
 Forebears' Holdout, where the kidnapped priest was taken. They creep toward
 the priest, captured in an ancient barrier, and questioned by a vampire.]

Malkus The more you fight me, the more you will suffer, mortal.

Dexion I will resist you, monster. I must!

Malkus How much longer can you keep this up, Moth Priest? Your mind was
        strong, but you're exhausted from the struggle.

Dexion Must... resist...

Malkus Yes, I can feel your defenses crumbling. You want it to end. You want
        to give in to me. Now, acknowledge me as your master!

Dexion Yes. master¹.

[They kill the vampires, then release Dexion. However, the bewitched priest is
 hostile, attacking immediately.]

Dexion I serve my master's will. But my master is dead, and his enemies will
        pay!

[He's soon defeated, snapping out of it.]

Dexion Wait, stop! I yield! That...that wasn't me you were fighting. I could
        see through my eyes, but I could not control my actions. Thank you for
        breaking that foul vampire's hold over me.

Dragonborn Are you alright?

Dexion I'm quite alright, thanks to you. Dexion Evicus is my name. I'm a Moth
        Priest of the White Gold Tower. These vampires claimed they had some
        purpose in store for me, but they wouldn't say what. Probably holding
        me for ransom, the fools.

Dragonborn I know why they needed you, because we need you for the same
            purpose.

Dexion You do? Alright then, enough mysteries.

        We're called the Dawnguard, and we need you to read an Elder Scroll.
        
         You have an Elder Scroll? Remarkable! If my knowledge of history
         serves me, I recall that the Dawnguard was an ancient order of vampire
         hunters. I will be happy to assist you with your Elder Scroll. Just
         tell me where I need to go.

        I'll explain later. Right now, we need your help and time is short.
        
         Well, you saved me from those vampires. I suppose the least I can do
         is hear you out.

Dragonborn You can find us at Fort Dawnguard, near Stendarr's Beacon.

Dexion Very well. I'll hurry on my way there before more of those vampires
        turn up.

[Everyone rendezvous at the Fort.]

Isran I'm impressed you could find a Moth Priest so quickly.

Dragonborn Does he have the Scroll? Is everything ready?

Isran For the reading? Yeah. Just let the old man know when you're ready.

Dexion Ah, hello there!

Dragonborn Glad you made it here safely, Dexion.

Dexion Ah, my rescuer! It's good to see you again.

Dragonborn Have my companions made you feel welcome?

Dexion It's not exactly the hospitality I'm used to, but your man Isran has
        seen to my needs well enough. And might I add, this is a remarkable
        fortress. I have colleagues back home that would love to study this
        place in detail.

Dragonborn Are you prepared to read the Elder Scroll?

Dexion Oh, most certainly! Let's find out what secrets the scroll can tell.
        Now, if everyone will please be quiet, I must concentrate.

[He opens the legendary scroll.]

Dexion I see a vision before me, an image of a great bow. I know this weapon!
        It is Auriel's Bow! Now a voice whispers, saying Among the night's
        children, a dread lord will rise. In an age of strife, when dragons
        return to the realm of men, darkness will mingle with light and the
        night and day will be as one. The voice fades and the words begin to
        shimmer and distort. But wait, there is more here. The secret of the
        bow's power is written elsewhere. I think there is more to the
        prophecy, recorded in other scrolls. Yes, I see them now... One
        contains the ancient secrets of the dragons, and the other speaks of
        the potency of ancient blood. My vision darkens, and I see no more. To
        know the complete prophecy, we must have the other two scrolls. I must
        rest now. The reading has made me weary.

Isran Come on, old man. You should get some rest.

|
[DW5b] PROPHET |===============================================================
|

[After returning the Chalice to its proper place, one returns to Harkon.]

Harkon Ah, you are here. Good.

Dragonborn You wanted to speak to me?

Harkon Yes, I did. When I told you that I was grateful for my daughter's safe
        return, I told the truth. But I did not tell you everything.

        I suspected as much.
        
         Good. Strong instincts and a cunning mind will serve you as well as
         blade, spell or claw.

        When do you plan to start trusting me?
        
         Do not presume to tell me who I can and cannot trust. I possess the
         wisdom of a dozen lifetimes, and I will make my own judgements. Now
         be silent, and hear what I have to say.

        As you know, vampires are powerful but we have limits. Our great enemy
        is the sun, and until recently it's an enemy we've had no way to fight.
        For centuries I searched for an answer to this problem. I found an old
        prophecy written by a Moth Priest, those scholars who read the Elder
        Scrolls. The prophecy tells of a time in which vampires will gain power
        over the sun, and will no longer fear its tyranny. I believe the secret
        to unraveling that prophecy is written in Serana's Elder Scroll. I have
        ordered the court to assemble. I have a new task for us all to carry
        out, and that includes you. Come now, and hear my proclamation.

[Harkon stands to address the other Volikhar vampires.]

Harkon Scions of the night! Hear my words! The prophesied time is at last upon
        us. Soon we will claim dominion over the sun itself, and forge a new
        realm of eternal darkness. Now that I have reclaimed one of my Elder
        Scrolls, we must find a Moth Priest to read it. I have spread false
        rumors about the discovery of an Elder Scroll in Skyrim to lure a Moth
        Priest here. Now it is time to see if those efforts have borne fruit.
        Go forth, and search the land for rumors of a Moth Priest within our
        borders. Look to the cities. Speak to the innkeepers, carriage drivers,
        anyone who would meet a traveler. Go now, and carry out this task. This
        is my command!

Ronthil A Moth Priest?

Garan It will be done my lord!

Vingalmo Hm. Most intriguing.

[Feran Sedri and Hestla run out immediately.]

Serana Any idea on how you're going to find a Moth Priest? Skyrim's a pretty
        big place.

        Do you have any ideas?
        Where would a Moth Priest actually go?
        
         Well, back before I...you know. The College of Winterhold was the
         first place I'd think to go for any kind of magic or historical thing.
         The wizards know about all kinds of things that people probably
         shouldn't know about.

         • Actually, now that I think of it...I'm going to come along with you.
           I've been really wanting to get out and explore a bit.

         • I'd...well, I'd come with you, but I don't know if I can trust your
           friend. Let me know if you want me along.

[The methods of finding info are the same as in the Dawnguard version of this
 quest above; to avoid overlap, see that section for the clue-finding stuff.
 Either way, the info points to Dragon Bridge. Crossing the landmark bridge
 itself soon shows an overturned carriage and dead vampires around it. A note
 left behind mentions Forebears' Holdout. Inside, they sneak toward the large
 light barrier and overhear the Dawnguard talking.]

Dawnguard Lieutenant Those vampires put up a hell of a fight.

Vanik I just hope we weren't too late. I'm not sure what they did to this
       Moth Priest, but he doesn't look right.

D. Lieutenant You think they turned him?

Vanik I don't know, maybe. Won't know until we get him out of there.

D. Lieutenant How do we do that?

Vanik I'm working on it, now give me some silence so I can think.

[The player slaughters the former allies, takes the weystone focus from the
 corpse of Malkus, and removes the barrier. The Moth Priest emerges bewitched
 and angry.]

Dexion Evicus I serve my master's will. But my master is dead, and his enemies
               will pay!

[One uses a vampiric seduction spell for calming, then feeds on him.]

Dexion By the divines! It's as if my eyes have been opened! I am blinded by
        the light of your majesty. I...I must obey you. What would you have of
        me, master?

Dragonborn I command you to travel to Castle Volkihar.

Dexion Certainly. Where can I find this castle?

Dragonborn Off the northern coast of Skyrim, due west of Solitude.

Dexion I'll set out at once, then.

[The good news is soon reported to Harkon.]

Harkon Well done! Somehow I knew it would be you and Serana who found our
        moth priest.

Dragonborn I have made the Moth Priest my thrall.

Harkon Yes, I see that. I trust his capture was not too difficult a task?

        The Dawnguard tried to stop me, but they posed no threat.
        
         I wish I could have been there to hear the sounds of their screams.

        The Dawnguard were there. They fought well, but not well enough.
        
         They are determined and well-armed, but foolish if they think they
         can defy us. We will deal with them in time.

        The Dawnguard were protecting him, and they nearly killed me.
        
         We both know that a band of fools with crossbows is no match for a
         scion of the ancient blood. I admit, I do not entirely understand
         your sense of humor.

        Well, your thrall awaits and we have given him the Elder Scroll.
        Command him to read it, and let us hear the words of prophecy together.

[One finds Dexion nearby.]

Dexion Master, I have done as you asked and traveled here.

Dragonborn I have a new task for you, thrall.

Dexion Of course. What is it that you need me to do?

Dragonborn You must read an Elder Scroll.

Dexion Ah, yes, the Elder Scroll! I admit, I'm looking forward to this.

Dragonborn Then you may begin your reading.

Dexion Of course, master. Now, if everyone will please be quiet, I must
        concentrate.

[He takes out the legendary scroll.]

Dexion I see a vision before me, an image of a great bow. I know this weapon!
        It is Auriel's Bow! Now a voice whispers, saying Among the night's
        children, a dread lord will rise. In an age of strife, when dragons
        return to the realm of men, darkness will mingle with light and the
        night and day will be as one. The voice fades and the words begin to
        shimmer and distort. But wait, there is more here. The secret of the
        bow's power is written elsewhere. I think there is more to the
        prophecy, recorded in other scrolls. Yes, I see them now... One
        contains the ancient secrets of the dragons, and the other speaks of
        the potency of ancient blood. My vision darkens, and I see no more. To
        know the complete prophecy, we must have the other two scrolls.

Harkon That was...not as useful as I would have liked. Even so, you did well.

Dragonborn Do you know where these other scrolls are?

Harkon My traitor wife stole one of them away and then disappeared. As for
        the other, the last that I heard, it was lost in the bowels of a
        Dwemer ruin. It seems our work is not yet done. But I have waited this
        long, and we are so very close now. I can wait a bit longer.

|

|

[After the crowd disperses following the Scroll's reading, Serana approaches.
 The quests from now on will be shared by Dawnguard and vampire alike, so some
 options may only make sense or appear based off that.]

Serana Do you have a moment to talk?

        What's on your mind?
        
         That Moth Priest, Dexion. He said we needed two other Elder Scrolls.
         I think I know where we can start looking.

        Can't it wait?
        
         Well, you could waste a lot of time trying to figure out our next
         move, or you could let me help. Your choice.

        Why didn't you say something earlier?
        
         • Didn't want that lot getting wind of it. Especially my father.
         • Half the people in your little crew would just as soon kill me as
           talk to me. That doesn't exactly make me want to open up. I got a
           warmer welcome from my father, and that's saying something.

        What is it between the two of you?
        
         Ever since he decided to make that prophecy his calling, we kind of
         drifted apart.

        Do you trust Harkon at all?
        
         It's not a question of trust...he's just obsessed with the prophecy.
         And from what I can tell, an thousand extra years of obsession haven't
         made him any better. We should have found him a hobby.

        Does Harkon even care about you anymore?
        
         You know, I've asked myself the same thing. I¹ thought¹...I hoped that
         if he saw me, he might feel something again. But I guess I don't
         really factor in at this point.

        I don't think he even sees me as his daughter anymore. I'm just...a
        means to an end.

Dragonborn So where is this Elder Scroll?

Serana We need to find my mother, Valerica. She'll definitely know where it
        is, and if we're lucky, she actually has it herself.

Dragonborn You said you didn't know where she went.

Serana The last time I saw her, she said that she'd go somewhere safe...
        somewhere that my father would never search. Other than that, she
        wouldn't tell me anything. But the way she said it...someplace he'd
        never search. It was cryptic, yet she called attention to it.

        Sounds like she was being cautious.
        
         Maybe. What I can't figure out is why she said it that way.

        We can't waste time on cryptic clues.
        
         If you have a better lead than this, I'm all ears.

        Maybe your mother didn't trust you, either.
        
         That's always a possibility. She was almost as obsessed as my father
         by the time she shut me in. But I can't worry about that now. We need
         the scroll, and she's our only lead.

        Besides, I can't imagine a single place my father would avoid looking.
        And he's had all this time, too. Any ideas?

        Hiding with the Dawnguard?
        
         • I doubt my mother would waste her time with those fools. They
           probably would have tried to kill her, and that has a way of souring
           relationships. Any other ideas?

         • They'd be even less welcoming to her than they've been to me. It
           would have been a bloodbath. And since the Dawnguard are still
           around, that must not have happened. Any other ideas?

        Sealed away like you were?
        
         I don't think so. She said she wanted to stay awake in case the
         situation was resolved. It had to be one of us, and, well, she's so
         much more powerful than I am. It just made sense for her to be out
         there. Anything else?

        How about right here, in the castle?² / In Castle Volkihar?²
        
         Wait...that almost makes sense!

         • I used to help my mother tend a garden in the courtyard here.
         • There's a courtyard in the castle. I used to help her tend a garden
           there.

        All of the ingredients for our potions came from there. She used to say
        that my father couldn't stand the place. Too...peaceful.

Dragonborn Isn't that pretty risky, staying around the castle?

Serana Oh, absolutely. But my mother's not a coward. That is...I don't think
        we'll actually trip over her there. But it's worth a look.

        How can we get in without your father noticing?²
        
         Trust me. I lived here for a very long time and I know every nook and
         cranny. 

        They aren't going to let us use the front door.²
        
         True. But I know a way we can get to the courtyard without arousing
         suspicion.

        There's an unused inlet on the northern side of the island that was
        used by the previous owners to bring supplies into the castle. An old
        escape tunnel from the castle exits there. I think that's our way in.

        Let's go to the castle's secret entrance.
        
         • Come on. It's just around the side.
         • It's around the side of the castle. Let's move.
         • Well, I don't take just anyone into the secret parts of the place
           I grew up. Get rid of this interloper and you and I can be on our
           way. I'll wait for you at the dock.

        Actually, I have some things to do first.
        
         Don't let me stand in your way, then. I'll be at the dock whenever
         you're ready.

[The two walk the Volkihar shore clockwise toward the inlet.]

Serana Yeah, just around this bend. Castle looks so big from down here. I
        mean, it is big, but, well, even bigger.

[Together, the player and Serana enter the deserted undercroft.]

Serana The old water cistern. One some days, this smell would just...be glad
        you weren't here then. Take a left up here. This is one of those weird
        double-barred security measures that my father put in when he got more
        paranoid. If we follow that path around, we can find the other switch.
        This leads out to the courtyard. Just head for the door.

[They continue on, eventually reaching the old garden, now gone to seed.]

Serana We've made it to the courtyard. Oh no... What happened to this place?
        Everything's been torn down... The whole place looks...well, dead. It's
        like we're the first to set foot here in centuries. This used to lead
        into the castle's great hall. It looks like my father had it sealed up.
        I used to walk through here after evening meals. It was beautiful,
        once. This was my mother's garden. It...do you know how beautiful
        something can be when it's tended by a master for hundreds of years?
        She would have hated to see it like this. Wait... Something's wrong
        with the moondial here. Some of the crests are missing and the dial is
        askew. I didn't even know the crests could be removed. Maybe my
        mother's trying to tell us something? I'm telling you, there's
        something strange with the moondial.

[The player can inquire further.]

Dragonborn What happened to the castle courtyard?

Serana If I had to guess, I'd say the moment mother fled the castle, father
        went on a rampage. Knowing him, anything at all that reminded him of
        her was just destroyed.

Dragonborn Then he just walled it off.

Serana It appears that way. I suppose he wanted to put the past behind him.
        Perhaps if he had spent more time with us, he would have recognized
        the beauty for himself.

Dragonborn What's so special about the moondial?

Serana Well, as far as I'm aware it's the only one in existence. The previous
        owners of the castle had a sundial in the courtyard, and obviously
        that didn't appeal to my mother. She persuaded an elven artisan to make
        some improvements. You can see the plates that show the phases of the
        moons, Masser and Secunda.

Dragonborn Does it work?

Serana That's the thing...what's the point of a moondial? I always wondered
        why she didn't just have the whole thing ripped out. But she loved it.
        I don't know. I guess it's like having a piece of art, if you're into
        that sort of thing.

Dragonborn So what exactly am I doing to it?

Serana Hard to say. Maybe if we found the missing crests, we could figure it
        out. Look around for the missing crests. Even in this mess, they should
        stick out.

[The player finds the crest, then places them correctly. The sundial reveals
 a hidden stairway below it.]

Serana Very clever, mother. Very clever. I've never been in those tunnels
        before, but I'd bet they run right under the courtyard and into the
        tower ruins. Well, at least we're getting closer. Let's go.

[They pull a hidden wall back with a lever, revealing a bloody kitchen.]

Serana I've never even seen this part of the castle before. Be careful. I
        don't know what might be around.

[They continue through the ancient halls, constantly ascending.]

Serana I don't think we've reached the top yet. I'd bet there's some kind of
        secret passage around here.

[They find a path behind the fireplace.]

Serana Leave it to my mother...always smarter than I gave her credit for.

[They reach the tower's apex, Valerica's old laboratory.]

Serana Look at this place. This has to be it! I knew she was deep into
        necromancy. I mean, she taught me everything I know. But I had no idea
        she had a setup like this. Look at all this. She must have spent years
        collecting these components. And what's this thing?

[She looks at a floor indentation with many concentric circles.]

Serana I'm not sure about this circle, but it's obviously...something. Let's
        take a look around. There has to be something here that tells us where
        she's gone.

        Do you think this would help? (Give journal)²
        
         You've found her journal! Let me take a look at it. (jump to What's
         this Soul Cairn...)

        What exactly are we looking for?
        
         My mother was meticulous about her research. If we can find her notes,
         there might be some hints in there.

        Did your mother keep gargoyles here?
        
         Not that I ever saw. My mother had a bit of a thing for magical
         constructs. Not...not what you're thinking. She just found them
         fascinating.

        Your mother maintained quite a laboratory.
        
         I had no idea that her laboratory even existed. She had an alchemy
         setup in her drawing room, but nothing that even comes close to what's
         here.

         What did she research?
         
          Looking at the equipment and materials, it looks like she was trying
          to advance her necromancy.

          To what end?
          
           I don't know. Certainly not longevity. Kind of a waste of time for
           a vampire.

        I remember she used to keep a small journal. See if you can dig it up.

[A journal is found on a shelf.]

Dragonborn I've found your mother's notes.

Serana You did? Let me see them.

Dragonborn What's this Soul Cairn that she mentions?

Serana I only know what she told me. She had a theory about soul gems. That
        the souls inside of them don't just vanish when they're used...they
        end up in the Soul Cairn.

Dragonborn Why did she care where used souls went?

Serana The Soul Cairn is home to very powerful beings. Necromancers send them
        souls, and receive powers of their own in return. My mother spent a lot
        of time trying to contact them directly, to travel to the Soul Cairn
        itself.

Dragonborn If she made it there, we'll find her.

Serana That circle in the center of the room is definitely some type of
        portal. If I'm reading this right, there's a formula here that should
        give us safe passage into the Soul Cairn.

Dragonborn What do we need?

Serana A handful of soul gem shards, some finely-ground bone meal, a good bit
        of purified void salts... Oh...damn it...

Dragonborn What's wrong?

Serana We're also going to need a sample of her blood. Which...if we could
        get that, we wouldn't even be trying to do this in the first place.

Dragonborn You share her blood.

Serana Hmmm. Not bad. We'd better hope that's good enough. Mistakes with these
        kinds of portals can be...gruesome. Anyway, enough of that. Let's get
        started.

        Are all of those ingredients here?
        
         Oh, definitely. Mother would have plenty of those materials in her
         laboratory, you just need to find them.

        I already found all of the ingredients.²
        
         Oh, good. Well then...let's head over to the portal vessel and I'll
         do the rest.

[The player collects the items and puts them in the vessel.]

Serana Then the rest is up to me. Are you ready to go? I'm not entirely sure
        what this thing is going to do when I add my blood.

        Can I ask you something first?
        
         Of course. What is it?

         What will you do if we find your mother?
         
          I've been asking myself the same thing since we came back to the
          castle. She was so sure of what we did to my father, I couldn't help
          but go along with her. I never thought of the cost.

          It sounds like she did everything for your sake.
          
           Possibly. I guess even a vampire mother is still a mother. She
           worried about me. About all of us. But she wanted to get me as far
           away from my father as possible before he really went over the edge.

          I don't know what she was thinking.
          
           Neither do I. She always seemed happy, before we heard the prophecy.
           Then it all changed. She became a different person. They both did.

          It sounds like she was pretty selfish.
          
           She wasn't, always. But I think you're right. She was practically
           smirking as we left home. Almost like she was proud of herself. Like
           she didn't just want to stop my father...she wanted to stick it to
           him, too.

           We won't know until we find her.
           
            Yes...yes, you're right. I'm sorry. I just didn't expect anyone to
            care how I felt about her. Thank you. Are we ready then?

            Let's get that portal open.
            
             All right. Here goes.

        I have some preparations to make, first.
        
         I'll be here. Don't take too long, now!

        I'm ready.
        
         Okay, here goes.
         
[Putting the blood in the vessel opens an otherworldly portal.]

Serana By the blood of my ancestors... She actually did it...created a portal
        to the Soul Cairn. Incredible.

[If one isn't a vampire, the Soul Cairn portal rejects the player.]

Serana Are you alright? That looked painful.

Dragonborn It was. What happened?

Serana Now that I think about it...I should have expected that. Sorry. It's
        hard to describe. The Soul Cairn is...well, hungry, for lack of a
        better word. It's trying to take your life essence as payment.

Dragonborn So there's no way in, then.

Serana There might be, but I don't think you're going to like it. Vampires
        aren't counted among the living. I could probably go through there
        without a problem.

Dragonborn Are you saying that I need to become a vampire?

Serana Not your first choice, I'd guess.

Dragonborn There has to be another way.

Serana Maybe. We could just pay the toll another way. It wants a soul, so
        we give it a soul. Yours.

Dragonborn Wouldn't that kill me?

Serana My mother taught me a trick or two. I could partially soul trap you,
        and offer that gem to the Ideal Masters. It might be enough to satisfy
        them. It would make you a bit weaker when we travel through the Soul
        Cairn, but we might be able to fix that once we're inside. Maybe.

Dragonborn Those are my only options?

Serana I'm sorry. I wish I knew a better way, something that would be easier
        for you. Just know that...whatever path you choose, I won't think any
        less of you. Sometimes things just have to be done. I know that better
        than anybody.

[If one decides to become a vampire to gain entry]

Dragonborn I don't see another way. I'll become a vampire.

Serana Are you sure? I'm willing to turn you, but you need to think it
        through. You'd become the very thing you'd sworn to destroy. I don't
        know how the Dawnguard will react.

        You're right. Let me think about it.
        
         I understand. Take your time.

        I'm ready.
        
         Turning someone is a very...personal thing for vampires. It's
         intimate. For us. I don't want you to feel like I'm forcing you into
         this.

         In that case, I'm glad you're the one doing it.
         
          Let's not waste too much time, then.

         I understand.
         
          Good.

         Let's just get it over with.
         
          As you wish.

         I promise to try and make this as painless as possible. Hold still.

[If one decides to get soul trapped to gain entry]

Dragonborn Soul trap me. I won't feel right as a vampire.

Serana Are you sure? I'm willing to do it, but you need to think it through.
        You'll remain mortal, but you'll find yourself weakened within the
        Soul Cairn.

        You're right. Let me think about it.
        
         I understand. Take your time.

        I'm ready.
        
         I know this is difficult for you. I hope you trust me. I'd never do
         anything that could hurt you.

         I trust you completely.
         
          Thank you.

         Don't worry about it.
         
          Oh. Good.

         Let's just get this over with.
         
          As you wish.

         I promise to make this as painless as possible. Hold still. Let's go.
         My mother must be waiting on the other side of that thing.

[Once one is soul-trapped or vampirized, the team can finally descend the
 steps into the magnificent new location.]

|

|

[With one Scroll in hand, and one apparently in Valerica's hands, it's time to
 track down the third's whereabouts. The College is the suggested destination,
 as before. One seeks out the librarian.]

Dragonborn I'm looking for an Elder Scroll.

Urag And what do you plan to do with it? Do you even know what you're asking
      about? 

      Tell me more about the Elder Scrolls.
      
       I knew it. Everyone comes in here, expecting my help, but they don't
       even have the proper questions. An Elder Scroll is an instrument of
       immense knowledge and power. To read an Elder Scroll, a person must
       have the most rigorously trained mind, or else risk madness. Even so,
       the Divines usually take the reader's sight as a price.

       A price for what?
       
        The simplest way to put it is knowledge, but there's nothing simple
        about an Elder Scroll. It's a reflection of all possible futures and
        all possible pasts. Each reader sees different reflections through
        different lenses, and may come away with a very different reading. But
        at the same time, all of it is true. Even the falsehoods. Especially
        the falsehoods.

       Who wrote the Elder Scrolls?
       
        It would take a month to explain to you how that very question doesn't
        even make sense. The Scrolls exist here, with us, but are also beyond
        and beneath. Before and after. They are bits of Divine made substance
        so we could know them. Sorry. Talking about the Scrolls, you usually
        end up in irritating and vague metaphors like that. Some people who
        study them devoutly go mad.

       All right. So do you have one that I could use?
       
        Ha!

      Of course I do. Do you have one here?
      
       You think even if I did have one here, I would let you see it? It would
       be kept under the highest security. The greatest thief in the world
       wouldn't be able to lay a finger on it. 

       Do you at least have any information on them?
       
        Of course.

       I need to find one and was told you could help.
       
        I don't know who told you that, but I'll do what I can. What we do have
        are plenty of books.

      I'll bring you everything we have on them, but it's not much. So don't
      get your hopes up. It's mostly lies, leavened with rumor and conjecture.

[He gets out a book written by Septimus Signus.]

Dragonborn This Ruminations book is incomprehensible.

Urag Aye, that's the work of Septimus Signus. He's the world's master on the
      nature of Elder Scrolls, but...well. He's been gone for a long while.
      Too long.

      Where did he go?
      
       Somewhere up north, in the ice fields. Said he found some old Dwemer
       artifact, but...well, that was years ago. Haven't heard from him since.

      He's dead?
      
       Oh no. I hope not. But even I haven't seen him in years, and we were
       close. Became obsessed with the Dwemer. Took off north saying he had
       found some old artifact. Haven't seen him since. Somewhere in the ice
       fields, if you want to try and find him.

[At this point, the quest ends, and Discerning the Transmundane begins. It's
 a completely different quest unrelated to the Dawnguard, but it needs to be
 done to find the scroll. See that section for relevant details.]

|

|

[The player and Serana enter the Soul Cairn, a dark, twisted landscape with
 many old ruins and buildings dotting the landscape. Lost souls roam around
 the fog-covered area.]

Serana • Let's keep moving. I feel like we're being watched.
        • I'd heard stories about the Soul Cairn, but never thought I'd see it
          myself. So far it's...about what I imagined.

[They make for a far-off castle with twin energy spires. There, one finds a
 barrier preventing entrance. Valerica is trapped on the other side.]

Serana Mother!

Valerica Maker...it can't be. Serana?!

Serana Is it really you? I can't believe it! How do we get inside? We have to
        talk.

Valerica Serana? What are you doing here? Where's your father?

Serana He doesn't know we're here. I don't have time to explain.

Valerica I must have failed. Harkon's found a way to decipher the prophecy,
          hasn't he.¹

Serana No, you've got it all wrong. We're here to complete the prophecy our
        way, not his.

Valerica Wait a moment...you've brought a stranger here? Have you lost your
          mind?

Serana No, you don't...

Valerica You. Come forward. I would speak with you.

          • So how has it come to pass that a vampire of mixed blood is in the
            company of my daughter?
          • So how has it come to pass that a vampire hunter is in the company
            of my daughter? It pains me to think you'd travel with Serana under
            the guise her protector in an effort to hunt me down.

          I've been keeping her safe.²
          
           Safe? You call bringing her here safe? Has she explained nothing to
           you?

          This is no ruse. I want to keep her safe.²
          
           Coming from one who murders vampires as a trade, I find it hard to
           believe your intentions are noble.

          I've saved her from your foolish plan.
          
           I find your choice of words quite interesting considering that
           Serana is in far more danger now than she was following my foolish
           plan.

          I'm just here for the Elder Scroll.
          
           Glorious. Serana claims you're her guardian, yet your first instinct
           appears to be greed. I see that my daughter is still as naive as
           ever.

          Serana has sacrificed everything to prevent Harkon from completing
          the prophecy. I would have expected her to explain that to you.

Dragonborn That's why I'm here for the Elder Scroll.

Valerica You think I'd have the audacity to place my own daughter in that
          tomb for the protection of her Elder Scroll alone? The scrolls are
          merely a means to an end. The key to the Tyranny of the Sun is Serana
          herself.

Dragonborn What do you mean?

Valerica When I fled Castle Volkihar, I fled with two Elder Scrolls. The
          scroll I presume you found with Serana speaks of Auriel and his
          arcane weapon, Auriel's Bow. The second scroll declares that The
          Blood of Coldharbour's Daughter will blind the eye of the Dragon.

Dragonborn How does Serana fit in?

Valerica Like myself, Serana was a human once. We were devout followers of
          Lord Molag Bal. Tradition dictates the females be offered to Molag
          Bal on his summoning day. Few survive the ordeal. Those that do
          emerge as a pure-blooded vampire. We call such confluences the
          Daughters of Coldharbour.

          The Tyranny of the Sun requires Serana's blood?
          
           Now you're beginning to see why I wanted to protect Serana, and why
           I've kept the other Elder Scroll as far from her as possible.

          Serana underwent this ritual willingly?
          
           It was expected of her, just as it was expected of me. Being
           selected as an offering to Molag Bal is an honor. She wouldn't have
           dared turn her back on that.

          Coldharbour?
          
           It's what some call the domain of Molag Bal. His place in Oblivion.

Dragonborn Are you saying Harkon means to kill her?

Valerica If Harkon obtained Auriel's Bow and Serana's blood was used to taint
          the weapon, the Tyranny of the Sun would be complete. In his eyes,
          she'd be dying for the good of all vampires.

Dragonborn I would never allow that to happen.

Valerica And how exactly do you plan on completing the prophecy without the
          death of my daughter?

          I'll kill Harkon.
          
           If you believe that, then you're a bigger fool than I originally
           suspected. Don't you think I weighed that option before I enacted
           my plans?

          I'll need your help.
          
           Have you been listening to me? Like Serana, I'm a pure-blooded
           vampire. My presence on Tamriel is as much of a danger as hers is.

          Perhaps her death is destined.
          
           No! I will not allow that to happen. The Elder Scrolls only tell of
           events that might be, not events that will be.

Dragonborn And Serana's opinion on this?

Valerica You care nothing for Serana or our plight.
 
          • You see the Tyranny of the Sun as your chance at deification, and
            like Harkon you won't hesitate to destroy anything that stands in
            your path.

          • Whether or not you've become one of us in order to survive the
            Soul Cairn, you're still a vampire hunter at heart. You're here
            because we're abominations in your mind. Evil creatures that need
            to be destroyed.

          Serana believes in me, why won't you?
          
           • Serana? This stranger may call himself vampire, but he knows
            nothing of our struggle. Why should I entrust you to him?

           • This stranger aligns himself with those who would hunt you down
             and slay you like an animal, yet I should entrust you to him?

          I'm just here for the Elder Scroll.²
          
           I see. You're simply here to stop the Tyranny of the Sun, despite
           the cost to Serana. Nothing else matters.

Serana This stranger has done more for me in the brief time I've known him
        than you've done in centuries!

Valerica How dare you! I gave up everything I cared about to protect you from
          that fanatic you call a father!

Serana Yes, he's a fanatic...he's changed. But he's still my father. Why can't
        you understand how that makes me feel?

Valerica Oh, Serana. If you'd only open your eyes. The moment your father
          discovers your role in the prophecy, that he needs your blood, you'd
          be in terrible danger.

Serana So to protect me, you decided to shut me away from everything I cared
        about? You never asked me if hiding in that tomb was the best course
        of action, you just expected me to follow you blindly. Both of you were
        obsessed with your own paths. Your motivations might have been
        different, but in the end, I'm still just a pawn to you, too. I want
        us to be a family again. But I don't know if we can ever have that.
        Maybe we don't deserve that kind of happiness. Maybe it isn't for us.
        But we have to stop him. Before he goes too far. And to do that, we
        need the Elder Scroll.

Valerica I'm sorry, Serana. I didn't know...I didn't see. I've allowed my
          hatred of your father to estrange us for too long. Forgive me. If you
          want the Elder Scroll, it's yours.

[She turns to the player.]

Valerica Your intentions are still somewhat unclear to me. But for Serana's
          sake, I'll assist you in any way that I can.

Dragonborn Do you have the Elder Scroll with you?

Valerica Yes. I've kept it safely secured here ever since I was imprisoned.

          • Fortunately, you seem to have already killed the Keepers
            maintaining the barrier around these ruins.

            Does that mean you can take us to it now?²
            
             Yes. Please, follow me. One more word of warning. There's a dragon
             that calls itself Durnehviir roaming the Cairn. The Ideal Masters
             have charged him with overseeing the Keepers, and will undoubtedly
             investigate the fact that the barrier has fallen.

          • Fortunately, you're in a position to breach the barrier that
            surrounds these ruins.

Dragonborn What do we need to do?

Valerica You need to locate the tallest of the rocky spires that surround
          these ruins. At their bases, the barrier's energy is being drawn from
          unfortunate souls that have been exiled here. Destroy the Keepers
          that are tending them, and it should bring the barrier down.

Dragonborn We'll return soon.

Valerica One more word of warning. There's a dragon that calls itself
          Durnehviir roaming the Cairn. Be wary of him. The Ideal Masters have
          charged him with overseeing the Keepers, and will undoubtedly
          intervene if you're perceived as a threat. Be careful, and keep my
          daughter safe.

Serana Let's kill those...Keeper things and get back to the prison.

[One can ask further questions.]

Dragonborn How did you become imprisoned here?

Valerica When I entered the Soul Cairn, I had intended to strike a bargain
          with the Ideal Masters, the custodians of this place.

Dragonborn What was the bargain?

Valerica I requested refuge in the Soul Cairn, and in exchange, I would
          provide the Ideal Masters the souls that they craved. If I had
          foreseen the value they placed on my own soul, I would never have
          come here.

Dragonborn They tricked you.

Valerica The Ideal Masters unleashed their Keepers and sent them to destroy
          me. Fortunately, I was able to hold them at bay and retreat into
          these ruins.

Dragonborn You became trapped.

Valerica Unfortunately, yes. Since the Keepers weren't able to claim my soul,
          they had their minions construct a barrier that I'd never be able to
          breach.

Dragonborn You've been imprisoned here for all this time?

Valerica Time has very little meaning to me. Consequently, it has little
          meaning to the Ideal Masters as well. I suppose you could call this
          the ultimate waiting game, each watching the other to see which will
          give in.

Dragonborn If I leave the Soul Cairn, can I safely return?

Valerica As you've been traveling in the Soul Cairn, your body has become
          attuned to it. Let's just say a tiny part of you rubbed off on it,
          and in its place, a bit of the Soul Cairn filled the void. You
          should find no difficulty using the portal any longer.

Dragonborn Why haven't you pursued the prophecy?

Valerica Harkon's vision is a world plunged in eternal darkness where the
          vampire can flourish and never again fear the tyranny of the sun.
          What he fails to realize is how much attention would be called to
          our kind if the prophecy came to fruition.

Dragonborn What sort of attention?

Valerica If eternal night fell, there are many who wouldn't stand for it. They
          would raise armies in attempts to return things to normal. The order
          of the day would be our destruction until every last vampire was
          hunted down and eliminated.

Dragonborn So you prefer living in the shadows.

Valerica I do. It's how the vampire has survived for millennia, and the only
          way we can continue to survive in the future.

Dragonborn Who are the Ideal Masters?

Valerica I know very little about them. They're mystic entities that lord over
          the Soul Cairn, controlling every aspect from its fabric to its
          appearance.

Dragonborn What do they resemble?

Valerica Well, some necromancers believe they are the crystalline structures
          dotting the Soul Cairn. I believe there's more to it than that.

Dragonborn How so?

Valerica I think they transcend what we perceive as a physical form. Perhaps
          they were once corporeal beings, but they've obviously reached a
          point where they no longer require a tangible presence.

Dragonborn And the crystals?

Valerica Conduits through which the Ideal Masters speak to their underlings
          and feed on their victims.

Dragonborn Why would they require sustenance?

Valerica The Ideal Masters's weakness is their insatiable hunger for pure
          souls. It's the reason for the Soul Cairn's existence, and the only
          leverage a necromancer has when bargaining with them.

Dragonborn What do the Masters provide in return?

Valerica The ability to summon powerful undead guardians as one would conjure
          an atronach or daedra. However, the majority of necromancers that are
          foolish enough to enter into a bargain with the Ideal Masters wind up
          here...as harvested souls.

[The player slays three Keepers, dispelling the barrier.]

Valerica You managed to destroy all three Keepers? Very impressive.

Dragonborn Are you able to give us the scroll now?

Valerica Yes. Please, follow me. Keep watch for Durnehviir. With the prison's
          barrier down, he's almost certain to investigate.

[They enter the prison's large courtyard.]

Serana Wait...I hear something!

Valerica It's Durnehviir...he's here! Defend yourselves!

[They fight the ancient dragon, fending off the skeletons his powers start to
 resurrect. Eventually, they stamp out his attacks.]

Valerica Forgive my astonishment, but I never thought I'd witness the death
          of that dragon.

Dragonborn What makes you say that?

Valerica Volumes written on Durnehviir allege that he can't be slain by normal
          means. It appears they were mistaken. Unless...

Dragonborn Go on.

Valerica The soul of a dragon is as resilient as its owner's scaly hide. It's
          possible that your killing blow merely displaced Durnehviir's
          physical form while he reconstitutes himself.

Dragonborn How long will that take?

Valerica Minutes? Hours? Years? I can't even begin to guess. I suggest we
          don't wait around to find out. Now, let's get your Elder Scroll and
          you can be on your way.

Serana Come on, she's leading us to the scroll.

[They find a sheltered alcove across the courtyard. One takes the scroll from
 an ornate box.]

Serana That's it. That's the last scroll. Come on, let's take it to Dexion.

Valerica Now that you've retrieved the Elder Scroll, you should be on your
          way. If there's anything I can do before you depart, you must let
          me know.

          Can you help me get my soul back?²
          
           So my daughter applied some of the lessons I taught her about
           necromancy, did she? Don't worry, I think I can help you.

           Good, I could use all the help I can get.
           
            Your soul essence was trapped inside a gem. When you and Serana
            entered the Soul Cairn, it was given to the Ideal Masters as
            payment. You simply need to retrieve the gem. The moment you touch
            it, your soul essence will be restored.

            Any idea where it could be?
            
             There's an offering altar not terribly far from here. I'm willing
             to bet that the gem you're looking for is there. Is there anything
             else? Could be your last chance.

          You're staying here?
          
           I have no choice. As I told you before, I'm a Daughter of
           Coldharbour. If I return to Tamriel, that increases Harkon's
           likelihood of bringing the Tyranny of the Sun to fruition.

           We'll return for you when we can.
           
            I appreciate your concern for me, but Serana is all I care about.
            You must keep her safe at all costs.

           We could use your help in Tamriel.
           
            As much as it pains me to send you and Serana back alone, I can't
            take the risk.

           We may never return.
           
            After what I've put Serana through, I would understand if she never
            wished to see me again. I leave that decision in your hands.

          Remember that Harkon is not to be trusted. No matter what he
          promises, he'll deceive you in order to get what he wants. And
          promise me you'll keep my daughter safe. She's the only thing of
          value I have left. Farewell. Remember that Harkon's not to be
          trusted.

Serana I'm glad we found the scroll, but I...I wish she could come with us.

[Dragonborn can inquire further.]

Dragonborn Why don't you come back with us?

Valerica Even if I could, it would only serve to hinder your efforts. Harkon
          would likely sense my return to Tamriel. The last thing you need
          right now is a trail for him to follow.

Dragonborn You said even if I could. Why?

Valerica Like Serana, I am a Daughter of Coldharbour, an¹ vampire offspring of
          Molag Bal. My presence in Tamriel would simply double the risk that
          Harkon could complete the prophecy.

Dragonborn And if Harkon failed?

Valerica The only way I'd even consider returning to Tamriel was if Harkon
          were not only to fail, but to be destroyed.

Dragonborn You hate him that much?

Valerica You must understand that he's no longer the man I married all that
          time ago. He's obsessed...insane. Everyone around him fears him as
          they would a rabid dog. For all of this to end, he must die.

[They exit the boneyard, only to find Durnehviir's spectral form waiting.]

Durnehviir Stay your weapons. I would speak with you, Qahnaarin.

Dragonborn I thought you were dead.

Durnehviir Cursed, not dead. Doomed to exist in this form for all eternity.
            Trapped between laas and dinok, between life and death.

            Why are we speaking?
            
             I believe in civility among seasoned warriors, and I find your ear
             worthy of my words. My claws have rended flesh from innumerable
             foes, but I have never once been felled on the field of battle.
             I therefore honor-name you Qahnaarin, or Vanquisher in your
             tongue.

             I found you equally worthy.
             
              Your words do me great honor. My desire to speak with you was
              born from the result of our battle, Qahnaarin. I merely wish to
              respectfully ask a favor of you.

            Didn't you try to kill me?
            
             The hostility was necessary. I was bound to an oath.

            I have more pressing matters at the moment.
            
             Forgive me, Qahnaarin. We will continue this when time releases
             you from its relentless grasp.

Dragonborn What kind of favor?

Durnehviir For countless years I've roamed the Soul Cairn, in unintended
            service to the Ideal Masters. Before this, I roamed the skies above
            Tamriel. I desire to return there.

Dragonborn What's stopping you?

Durnehviir I fear that my time here has taken its toll on me. I share a bond
            with this dreaded place. If I ventured far from the Soul Cairn, my
            strength would begin to wane until I was no more.

Dragonborn How could I help?

Durnehviir I will place my name with you and grant you the right to call my
            name from Tamriel. Do me this simple honor and I will fight at your
            side as your Grah-Zeymahzin, your Ally, and teach you my Thu'um.

Dragonborn Just call your name in Tamriel? That's it?

Durnehviir Trivial in your mind, perhaps. For me, it would mean a great deal.
            I don't require an answer, Qahnaarin. Simply speak my name to the
            heavens when you feel the time is right.

[He teaches his thu'um. One can inquire further.]

Dragonborn Why do you call me Qahnaarin?

Durnehviir In my language, the Qahnaarin is the Vanquisher, the one who has
            bested a fellow dovah in battle.

Dragonborn Fellow dovah? I am not a dragon.
            
Durnehviir Forgive me, my instinct was to grant you this title. I am uncertain
            why. Perhaps one day it will become clear to both of us.

Dragonborn How did you end up in the Soul Cairn?

Durnehviir There was a time when I called Tamriel my home, but those days have
            long since passed. The dovah roamed the skies, vying for their
            small slices of territory that resulted in immense and ultimately
            fatal battles.

Dragonborn Were you a part of all that?

Durnehviir I was. But unlike some of my brethren, I sought solutions outside
            the norm in order to maintain my superiority. I began to explore
            what the dovah call Alok-Dilon, the ancient forbidden art that
            you call necromancy.

Dragonborn So you sought the Soul Cairn for answers.

Durnehviir The Ideal Masters assured me that my powers would be unmatched,
            that I could raise legions of the undead. In return, I was to serve
            them as a Keeper until the death of the one who calls herself
            Valerica.

Dragonborn They didn't tell you she was immortal.

Durnehviir I discovered too late that the Ideal Masters favor deception over
            honor and had no intention of releasing me from my binding. They
            had control of my mind, but fortunately they couldn't possess my
            soul.

Dragonborn Is that why you're free now?

Durnehviir Free? No. I've been here too long, Qahnaarin. The Soul Cairn has
            become a part of what I am. I can never fully call Tamriel my home
            again, or I would surely perish. I only hope that you will allow me
            the precious moments of time there through your call.

[After hearing the necrodragon's words, it's back to Castle Volkihar...]

|

|  This is another shared Dawnguard/Vampire quest.

[The team emerges from the Cairn.]

Serana The sooner we get the scroll home, the sooner we can deal with my
        father.

Dexion I trust your journey was successful?

Dragonborn I've brought the Elder Scrolls.

Dexion I'm sorry, my friend. I can no longer be of use in this matter.

Dragonborn Why? What's happened?

Dexion It's my fault. In my haste to read the first scroll, I neglected the
        careful preparation required. I thought I'd be able to allay the
        after effects¹, but I was wrong. Now I'm paying for it.

Dragonborn That covering on your eyes. Are you--

Dexion Blind? Yes. I'm afraid so.

Dragonborn Can anything be done to help you?

Dexion No. It'll have to run its course, and there's always the chance I may
        never recover.

Dragonborn Then we're finished.

Dexion No, there's another way. The question is, how much are you willing to
        risk to find Auriel's Bow?

Dragonborn What do I need to do?

Dexion I can't guarantee you'll be free from harm. Becoming blind could be the
        least of your worries.

Dragonborn Don't worry about that. Just tell me.

[They return to Dexion, who now appears with a blindfold.]

Dexion Yes, how may I serve you, milord?

Dragonborn I've brought the Elder Scrolls.

Dexion I'm afraid I won't be able to help you with the scrolls any longer,
        milord. Please, do not be angry with me.

Dragonborn What are you talking about?

Dexion I'm afraid in my haste to read the first scroll, I neglected the time
        I needed to prepare. The failure is purely mine to bear. As you can
        see from my bandages, it's not that I'm unwilling, it is that I'm
        physically unable.

Dragonborn You're blind!

Dexion Oh please, milord! Please...forgive me!

Dragonborn I don't suppose there's a cure.

Dexion If only such a miracle existed, I'd overcome the impossible in order
        to secure it if it meant pleasing you.

Dragonborn Then we have no further need of you.

Dexion Although I would gladly die by your hand, perhaps I could offer an
        alternative way to read the scrolls?

Dragonborn Go on.

Dexion Oh thank you, milord. Thank you!

Dragonborn Just get to it!

Dexion Scattered across Tamriel are secluded locations known only as Ancestor
        Glades. There's one in Skyrim, in the Pine Forest. Performing the
        Ritual of the Ancestor Moth within the glade should provide the
        answers you seek.

Dragonborn Explain this ritual.

Dexion It involves carefully removing the bark from the Canticle Tree which
        will in turn attract Ancestor Moths to you. Once enough of the moths
        are following, they'll provide you with the second sight needed to
        decipher the scrolls.

Dragonborn Carefully gather the bark? How?

Dexion In keeping with tradition, you must use a specific tool in the Ancestor
        Glade, an implement known as a Draw Knife. Every Moth Priest is taught
        this ritual, but few ever get the chance to perform it...you should
        consider yourself fortunate if it works for you.

Dragonborn Do I need to read the scrolls in any particular order?

Dexion From what I saw in the vision, the Elder Scroll which foreshadows the
        defiance of the gods with the blood of mortals is the key to the
        prophecy.

[One can talk to Dexion about new options at this point.]

Dragonborn How's a moth related to the Elder Scrolls?

Dexion Well, as I am sure you've figured out by now, it's no mere coincidence
        we are named Moth Priests. The voice of the Ancestor Moth has always
        been an integral part of reading the Elder Scrolls.

Dragonborn Moths barely make a sound, let alone speak.

Dexion Oh, the moths don't literally read the scrolls...but they maintain a
        connection to ancient magic that allows the Moth Priests to decipher
        them. If you listen closely when you find the glade, you should be able
        to hear their song...a soft, harmonious trilling. It's through this
        ancestral chorus that the moths tap into a form of primal augur and
        become a conduit for deciphering the scrolls.

Dragonborn How does that help the Moth Priest?

Dexion By having the Ancestor Moths close to the Moth Priest, they can utilize
        the conduit and share the moth's augury. Only the most resilient of
        priests can do it this way...it takes years of practice to interpret
        the harmony.

Dragonborn Then how do I even stand a chance?

Dexion You've come this far, and you've found several Elder Scrolls. Whether
        you believe it or not, the scrolls have a mind of their own. If they
        didn't want you to find them, they wouldn't allow it. Because of this,
        I strongly believe you were meant to hear the ancestral chorus. Only
        one way to find out.

Dragonborn What went wrong?

Dexion Deciphering one of the Elder Scrolls is nothing like reading a simple
        book. There is quite a bit of ritual and concentration required. It
        can take months or even years to complete a single scroll and even
        then, months to recover.

Dragonborn Is it normal for Moth Priests to go blind?

Dexion Sadly, yes. It is the inevitable fate we agree to pursue when reading
        the Elder Scrolls. It generally does not occur until a Moth Priest is
        in his latter years, but in my case I simply was not preparing myself
        properly.

|

|

[The player and Serana visit the glade, high in Falkreath's mountains. Inside
 is a bunch of loose foliage and crags.]

Serana This must be the place. Hmph...not very impressive, is it? If this ends
        up being a wasted trip, your friend Dexion and I are going to have some
        words when we get back.

[They head further in, finding a massive cavern, replete with a freshwater
 waterfall and spring, plus trees everywhere.]

Serana Wow. Look at this place. No one's been here in centuries. I doubt
        there's any other place like it in Skyrim. It's beautiful.

[They find a draw knife in a ceremonial holder below.]

Serana Well, we got the knife...now all we need to do is track down one of
        those Canticle Trees.

[There's a blossoming Canticle on a higher ledge.]

Serana Hope those moths like that bark as much as Dexion said they would.
        Dexion didn't really give us a lot to go on, did he?

[One moves around the area, finding swarms of moths and getting them to follow
 with the others.]

Serana Look at them...they've definitely taken a liking to you. And unless
        I'm seeing things, you're starting to...glimmer.

[Soon, a sphere of ancient light is enveloping the player.]

Serana Woah! I think that might have been what we were waiting for. Let's
        head back up there and see if we can read the scrolls.

[They go to the spring and stand in a column of sunlight. The player begins
 reading the the Blood scroll.]

Serana Nervous?

[The player reads the scrolls, and sees some kind of cryptic map.]

Serana Are you okay? Almost thought I lost you there...you went as white as
        the snow.

        Don't worry, I'm fine.
        
         I never trusted those damn scrolls. Who knows what those things could
         have done to you...just look at Dexion.

        That felt strange.
        
         I could see it in your eyes. You looked about a thousand leagues away.

        Never mind that...it worked!
        
         After everything we've been through, it had damn well better work.

        What about Auriel's Bow? Do you know where we can find it?

Dragonborn It's in a place called Darkfall Cave.

Serana Then it's almost over.

        • We can finally rewrite the prophecy as we see fit.
        • We can finally put an end to this ridiculous prophecy.

        Where is this Darkfall Cave?

Dragonborn The scrolls gave me its exact location.

Serana Then let's get going. I want to get there before my father has a chance
        to track us down.

[They leave, just in time to slay intruders from the faction opposite the one
 they're currently aligned with.]

|

|

[The cave is located in the NW mountains, not far from Mor Khazgur. There's
 a short tunnel overlooking a massive torrent of water. With nowhere else to
 go, the duo jumps in, being swept downstream to the shallows. Eventually,
 they come across a small campsite with corpses stewn around.]

Serana These people were...why would anyone want to set up camp here? I wonder
        what happened to them.

[After slaying some trolls, they see a man at a deep shrine.]

Serana What's that? I can feel some kind of power from it...

Gelebor Come forward. You have nothing to fear here.

[They approach Gelebor at his humble campsite.]

Gelebor I am Knight-Paladin Gelebor. Welcome to the Great Chantry of Auri-El.

Dragonborn This cave is a temple to Auriel?

Gelebor Auriel, Auri-El, Alkosh, Akatosh...so many different names for the
         sovereign of the snow elves.

Dragonborn Snow elves? You're a Falmer?

Gelebor I prefer snow elf. The name Falmer usually holds a negative meaning
         to most travelers. Those twisted creatures you call Falmer, I call
         the Betrayed.

Dragonborn I imagine you know why we're here.

Gelebor Of course. You're here for Auriel's Bow. Why else would you be here?
         I can help you get it, but first I must have your assistance.

         What type of assistance do you need?
         
          I need you to kill Arch-Curate Vyrthur...my brother.

         Do I have a choice?
         
          Absolutely. You could turn around and travel back from wherever you
          started empty handed¹, or you could assist me.

         How did you know?
         
          For the thousands of years I've served as the Chantry's sentinel,
          there hasn't been a single visitor here for any other reason. They
          request Auriel's Bow, and I request their assistance. It's been
          repeated so many times, I can't imagine it any other way.

Dragonborn Kill your brother, why?

Gelebor The kinship between us is gone. I don't understand what he's become,
         but he's no longer the brother I once knew. It was the Betrayed...
         they did something to him, I just don't know why Auri-El would allow
         this to happen.

Dragonborn What exactly did the Betrayed do?

Gelebor They swept into the Chantry without warning and began killing everyone
         without pause.

Dragonborn Didn't you fight back?

Gelebor The Chantry was a place of peaceful worship. I led a small group of
         paladins, but we were no match for the Betrayed's sheer numbers. They
         slaughtered everyone and stormed the Inner Sanctum where I believe
         they corrupted Vyrthur.

Dragonborn You don't even know if he's alive.

Gelebor He's alive. I've seen him. But something's wrong. He never looks as
         though he's in pain or under duress. He just...stands there and
         watches, as though waiting.

Dragonborn Have you tried getting into the Inner Sanctum?

Gelebor Leaving the wayshrines unguarded would be violating my sacred duty as
         a Knight-Paladin of Auriel. And an assault on the Betrayed guarding
         the Inner Sanctum would only end with my death.

Dragonborn Wayshrine?

Gelebor Yes, let me show you.

[The strange monument nearby rises, revealing it was actually a small, shrunken
 pavilion with only a ceremonial basin inside.]

Serana So, this is snow elf magic. Incredible.

Gelebor This structure is known as a wayshrine. They were used for meditation
         and for transport when the Chantry was a place of enlightenment.
         Prelates of these shrines were charged with teaching the mantras of
         Auri-El to our Initiates.

Serana What's that basin in the center signify?

Gelebor Once the Initiate completed his mantras, he'd dip a ceremonial ewer
         in the basin of the wayshrine's center and proceed to the next
         wayshrine.

Serana So these Initiates had to lug around a heavy pitcher of water. 
        Marvelous. How long would they have to do that?

Gelebor Well, once the Initiate's enlightenment was complete, he'd bring the
         ewer to the Chantry's Inner Sanctum. Pouring the contents of the ewer
         into the sacred basin of the Sanctum would allow him to enter for an
         audience with the Arch-Curate himself.

Serana All that just to end up dumping it out? Makes no sense to me.

Gelebor It's symbolic. I don't expect you to understand.

Serana So, let's get this straight. We need to do all that nonsense to get
        into the temple, so we can kill your brother and claim Auriel's Bow?

Gelebor I know how it all sounds, but if there was another way I'd have done
         it long ago. The only way to get to my brother is by following in the
         Initiates' footsteps and traveling from wayshrine to wayshrine just
         as they did. The first lay at the end of Darkfall Passage, a cavern
         that represents the absence of enlightenment.

Dragonborn How many more wayshrines are there?

Gelebor There are five in total, spread far across the Chantry.

Dragonborn These caves must be massive.

Gelebor Caves? Oh, no. The Chantry encompasses far more than a few caves, as
         you'll soon discover. But before I send you on your way, you'll need
         the Initiate's Ewer.

Dragonborn So I need to fill this at each wayshrine?

Gelebor Once you've located a wayshrine, there will be spectral Prelate
         tending to it. They will allow you to draw the waters from the
         shrine's basin as if you've been enlightened.

Dragonborn I'll be off then.

Gelebor This may be the last time we're able to converse. If you have any
         questions before you leave, I suggest you ask them. Otherwise, all I
         can do now is grant you my hopes for a safe journey.

[If one inquires further to Gelebor...]

Gelebor Questions? I expected as much.

Dragonborn Who are the spectral Prelates you mentioned?

Gelebor They're ghosts of the snow elf priests that tended the wayshrines
         before being slaughtered by the Betrayed. Through the grace of
         Auri-El, they were restored to their spectral form to enable them to
         continue their duties.

Dragonborn Good, they should be able to help us.

Gelebor I'm afraid in their current form, they still believe the Chantry to be
         an active center of worship. They won't respond to you in any way
         other than believing that you're an Initiate and you're undertaking
         the journey to the Inner Sanctum.

Dragonborn What is the Chantry of Auri-El?

Gelebor This is, or was, the epicenter for our religion. Most of the snow elf
         people worshipped Auri-El. The Chantry was constructed near the
         beginning of the First Era to provide a retreat to those that wished
         to become enlightened.

Dragonborn Most snow elves?

Gelebor Our empire had temples to some of the other deities Trinimac,
         Syrabane, Jephre and Phynaster rounded out the rest. But those temples
         paled in comparison to the glory of the Chantry and its wayshrines.

Dragonborn The wayshrines are part of the Chantry then?

Gelebor Oh yes. They were an important part of the process here. They
         represented the steps the Initiates took on the path to total
         enlightenment. Sadly, the magic used to construct these wonders were
         lost long before I arrived here.

Dragonborn Who were your people?

Gelebor We were once a wealthy and prosperous society that occupied a portion
         of Skyrim. Unfortunately, we were constantly at war with the Nords
         who claimed the land as their ancestral home.

Dragonborn It appears the Nords won.

Gelebor In a manner of speaking. We had always maintained an uneasy alliance
         with the underground-dwelling dwarves, and when faced with extinction
         we turned to them for help. Surprisingly, they agreed to protect us
         but demanded a terrible price...the blinding of our race.

Dragonborn Everyone couldn't have possibly agreed to that.

Gelebor There were splinter groups that resisted the agreement, and even some
         that sought alternate alliances. But when it was all said and done,
         those elves were either slaughtered, vanished or gave up and took the
         dwarves' bargain.

Dragonborn What turned your people into the Betrayed?

Gelebor I've often asked myself the same question. The blinding of my race
         was supposedly accomplished with a toxin. Certainly not enough to
         devolve them into the sad and twisted beings they've become.

Dragonborn Why weren't the snow elves here afflicted?

Gelebor The Chantry is quite isolated, so it took some time for word of the
         dwarves' offer to reach us here. By the time the compact had been
         completed, it was too late for us to even attempt to intervene.

Dragonborn Is that why you had retained your sight?

Gelebor Correct. We only numbered perhaps a hundred at the time, so our
         presence remained a secret to the dwarves and the Nords. Ironically,
         our undoing came at the hands of our own people.

Dragonborn You mean the Betrayed.

Gelebor Yes. They swarmed the Chantry in vast numbers until we were completely
         overrun. We never really stood a chance. I assume that the Arch-Curate
         was corrupted by them when they found a way to breach the Inner
         Sanctum.

Dragonborn There were others here like you?

Gelebor Vyrthur and myself are the only two snow elves that remain.

[The snow elf magic opens a wayshrine portal to Darkfall Passage.]

Serana Well...that wasn't as unpleasant as I thought it would be. Kind of
        soothing, actually. I feel a little warmer, now.

[They start slaying the Falmer inhabitants.]

Serana Looks like these Falmer are here to stay. They must be who that priest
        was calling the Betrayed.

[They come to a pull-chain door with a warrior's skeleton beside it.]

Serana Hmmm. Pull chains and traps. Be careful here. Whatever's on the other
        side of this, the Falmer wanted to keep there.

[They find a Vale Sabre Cat beyond, one of the first new Chantry monsters. The
 duo progresses downward through the mountain passage, past crystal-ridden
 caverns filled with strange animals.]

Serana This is the kind of thing I've been wanting to see. Makes everything
        worth it. I think that's another wayshrine up there. Here we go.

[They come upon a shrine and its ghostly prelate.]

Sidanyis Welcome, Initiate. This is the Wayshrine of Illumination. Are you
          prepared to honor the mantras of Auri-El and fill your vessel with
          His enlightenment?

Dragonborn Yes.

Sidanyis Then behold Auri-El's gift, my child. May it light your path as you
          seek tranquility within the Inner Sanctum. May Auri-El's brilliance
          illuminate your path.

[They fill the ewer and reach the Forgotten Vale. Unlike the rest of Skyrim,
 this mountain-tucked landscape has the remnants of snow elf architecture.]

Serana This is incredible. It's like a whole other world. Come on, the bow
        has to be in this valley somewhere. Is that another one of those
        wayshrines up there? I wonder where this one goes...

[They reach the nearby shrine.]

Athring Welcome, Initiate. This is the Wayshrine of Sight. Are you prepared
         to honor the mantras of Auri-El and fill your vessel with His
         enlightenment?

Dragonborn Yes.

Athring Then behold Auri-El's gift, my child. May it speed your journey to the
         Inner Sanctum. May Auri-El's light guide you in your darkest hours.

[They continue on.]

Serana Is that another one of those wayshrines up there? I wonder where this
        one goes...

[They reach the next shrine.]

Celegriath You've reached the Wayshrine of Learning, Initiate. Are you
            prepared to honor the mantras of Auri-El and fill your vessel with
            His enlightenment?

Dragonborn Yes.

Celegriath Auri-El bless you, child. For you are a step closer to the Inner
            Sanctum and everlasting wisdom. May Auri-El's warmth imbue your
            body with strength.

[From the riverbank, they spot the next 'shrine on a far-off cliff.]

Serana If we open that one, we'll be able to move around this valley a lot
        faster.

[They reach it.]

Nirilor You've arrived at the Wayshrine of Resolution. Are you prepared to
         honor the mantras of Auri-El and fill your vessel with His
         enlightenment?

Dragonborn Yes.

Nirilor Then go forth, child. May the enrichment of Auri-El strengthen your
         resolve as you undertake your journey to the Inner Sanctum. May
         Auri-El's glow shield you from your enemy.

[To reach the final shrine, Serana and her helper must travel the Falmer-choked
 mountain canyon. In the ensuing cave, they come across more Betrayed fighting
 a troll, and must put them down one and all.]

Serana Poor thing. I know it would have tried to kill us, but still...

[There's a rickety bridge nearby.]

Serana Not the most solid construction. About what I'd expect from...creatures
        like this. Looks like they're better at making traps than they are at
        making bridges. A strange race, these Falmer.

[Through a glacial crevice, the final wayshrine is finally in sight.]

Edhelbor You've found the Wayshrine of Radiance, Initiate. Are you prepared
          to honor the mantras of Auri-El and fill your vessel with His
          enlightenment?

Dragonborn Yes.

Edhelbor May the blessings of Auri-El protect you as you climb the road to
          the Inner Sanctum and final enlightenment. May Auri-El's radiance
          fill your heart with joy.

[The Inner Sanctum, a marvel of snow elf design, is right nearby.]

Serana That...that has to be the place. I've never seen a building like that
        before. It looks like some kind of temple. Never saw anything like this
        back on the island.

[They enter the courtyard.]

Serana That is a statue of Auriel, but it's using the older signs of his
        power. This temple must be ancient. The bow has to be in here.

[As the water is placed in the final basin, it opens the destination's door.
 Inside, the long-frozen corpses of snow elves can be seen.]

Serana These Falmer are...they're frozen in the ice. I wonder how long they've
        been like this. And I thought the Soul Cairn was creepy.

[They reach the chapel, cut right into the glacier. The Arch-Curate's there.]

Vyrthur Did you really come here expecting to claim Auriel's Bow? You've done
         exactly as I predicted and brought your fetching companion to me.

Serana Wait, is he talking about me?

Vyrthur Which, I'm sorry to say, means your usefulness is at an end!

[They destroy the frozen Falmer he unleashes.]

Vyrthur An impressive display, but a wasted effort. You delay nothing but your
         own deaths!

Serana Watch out! He's pulling down the ceiling!

Vyrthur Finish them!

[More of his icy acolytes are smashed.]

Vyrthur This has gone on long enough. Child, my life ended long before you
         were born!

[They kill all his companions.]

Vyrthur No...I won't let you ruin centuries of preparations...

Serana Surrender and give us the bow!

Vyrthur Death first!

[The snow elf magic destroys the Sanctum's walls and ceiling.]

Serana Are you alright? Come on, we can do this. I know we can. He's up there,
        on the balcony. Come on!

[They corner him.]

Serana Enough, Vyrthur. Give us the bow!

Vyrthur How dare you. I was the Arch-Curate of Auri-El, girl. I had the ears
         of a god!

Serana Until the Betrayed corrupted you. Yes, yes. We've heard this sad
        story.

Vyrthur Gelebor and his kind are easily manipulated fools. Look into my eyes,
         Serana. You tell me what I am.

Serana You're...you're a vampire? But Auriel should have protected you...

Vyrthur The moment I was infected by one of my own Initiates, Auri-El turned
         his back on me. I swore I'd have my revenge, no matter what the cost.

Serana You want to take revenge...on a god?

Vyrthur Auri-El himself may have been beyond my reach, but his influence on
         our world wasn't. All I needed was the blood of a vampire and his own
         weapon, Auriel's Bow.

Serana The blood of a vampire...Auriel's Bow... It...it was you? You created
        that prophecy?

Vyrthur A prophecy that lacked a single, final ingredient...the blood of a
         pure vampire. The blood of a Daughter of Coldharbour.

Serana You were waiting...all this time for someone with my blood to come
        along. Well, too bad for you...I intend on keeping it. Let's see if
        your blood has any power to it!

Vyrthur What trickery is this!

[They kill him.]

Vyrthur Farewell.

[His death activates the final wayshrine. Gelebor steps out.]

Gelebor So, the deed has been done. The restoration of this wayshrine means
         that Vyrthur must be dead and the Betrayed no longer have control
         over him.

Dragonborn The Betrayed weren't to blame.

Gelebor What? What are you talking about?

Dragonborn He was a vampire. He controlled them.

Gelebor A vampire? I see. That would explain much. Deep inside, it brings me
         joy that the Betrayed weren't to blame for what happened here.

Dragonborn Why?

Gelebor Because that means there's still hope that they might one day shed
         their hatred and learn to believe in Auri-El once again. It's been
         a long time since I felt that way and it's been long overdue. My
         thanks, to both of you.

Dragonborn You're welcome.

Gelebor You risked everything to get Auri-El's Bow, and in return, you've
         restored the Chantry. I can't think of a more deserving champion to
         carry it than you. If you wish to learn more about the bow, or obtain
         Sunhallowed Arrows for it, I'd be more than happy to help. You've but
         to ask.

[One can inquire further.]

Gelebor Please, take the bow...it's yours.

Dragonborn What will happen to you now?

Gelebor Even with Vyrthur gone and the Inner Sanctum destroyed, my duty as a
         Knight-Paladin of Auri-El remains. I've been sworn to protect this
         vale and everything it represents until I die.

Dragonborn And the wayshrines?

Gelebor For the time being, they will remain open. If remnants of our kind
         who escaped the betrayal at the hands of the dwarves exist out there,
         perhaps they will find this place one day.

Dragonborn What can you tell me about Auriel's Bow?

Gelebor The bow was said to be carried by Auri-El himself into battle against
         the forces of Lorkhan in ancient and mythic times. Its craftsmanship
         has no equal anywhere within Tamriel and possibly beyond.

Dragonborn What can it do?

Gelebor The bow draws its power from Aetherius itself, channeling it through
         the sun. Therefore, when an arrow is loosed from the bow, it produces
         a magical effect very similar to being burned by fire.

Dragonborn Sounds powerful.

Gelebor That's actually only a fraction of its potential. With Sunhallowed
         Arrows, you would be able to produce a much more spectacular effect...
         causing bursts of sunlight to envelop your foes. The sunbursts would
         certainly hurt anything, but is especially devastating to the undead.

Dragonborn Vyrthur said something about using blood?

Gelebor Well, using an arrow with the bow that's been dipped in blood may
         cause it to function differently...corrupting its purpose. That's of
         course if you're foolish enough to try it.

Dragonborn How do I obtain Sunhallowed Arrows?

Gelebor I can actually assist you in that regard. If you were to bring me some
         good quality elven arrows, I could imbue them with the proper
         incantations and rituals.

Dragonborn Can you make me some Sunhallowed Arrows?

            • Absolutely. I can only do twenty at a time, so if you want the
              rest of your arrows blessed, let me know.
            • Absolutely. I can only do twenty at a time, but I see that won't
              be a problem in this case.
            • I'm afraid I'll need elven arrows if you want me to produce
              Sunhallowed Arrows, and it seems you're all out of them at the
              moment.

Dragonborn Can the Betrayed ever be cured?

Gelebor I feel nothing but sympathy for the Betrayed, despite my actions
         against them. But I'm afraid that they're well beyond a cure at this
         point.

Dragonborn Why?

Gelebor The twisted forms you've seen didn't occur overnight. It isn't a
         plague or a disease that ravaged our species. The dwarves may have
         stolen their sight, but it took many generations for them to become
         what they are today.

Dragonborn Then there's no hope for them.

Gelebor Perhaps they'll never return to their former appearance, but over the
         centuries, I've noticed a rise in their intellect. If a line of
         communication could be established with them, maybe they can find
         peace. It's the only way they'll discover that they weren't always
         malignant...they were once a proud and prosperous race.

Dragonborn What will happen to the Chantry now?

Gelebor While it would fill me with joy to see the Chantry back to its former
         glory, that time has long since passed. Now that my brother's dead,
         it's quite possibly I'm the last of our kind.

Dragonborn Then I've contributed to your kind's extinction.

Gelebor There's no need for that kind of talk. I said it was possible. It's
         also quite possible that there are some other isolated conclaves of
         snow elves nestled elsewhere on Nirn. I'll also assume Vyrthur didn't
         exactly give you the option to stay your hand.

Dragonborn What will you do then?

Gelebor For the time being I will remain here, on the overlook and continue
         trying to keep the Sanctum free of the Betrayed. You're always welcome
         to return here at any time, of course.

|

|

[The player claims the hallowed bow from the shrine.]

Serana It's...not as shiny as I was expecting. Still, it's beautiful.

Dragonborn What do we do now?

Serana • Well, before we spoke to my mother in the Soul Cairn, I would have
          said we bring the bow to my father. But after everything with her...I
          don't think we can trust him.

        • I think we both know...it's time to face my father. If we don't,
          he'll keep chasing us for the rest of our lives.

        Then we kill him, before he kills us.²
        
         I keep thinking that there's got to be another way, but he'll turn on
         us the moment he gets the chance.

        If we do, he'll have to die.²
        
         I've been thinking about this for a long time. It's...it's not easy.
         But I don't think we have much of a choice.

        We have the bow, he'll listen to us.²
        
         Have you been paying attention to everything that's happened? He'll
         betray us the second our backs are turned.

        Maybe we can reason with him.²
        
         Have you been paying attention? It's obvious my father's well beyond
         reason.

        We should honor our agreement with him.²
        
         Are you out of your mind? The moment you hand over the bow your
         usefulness ends. He'll kill you and then he'll take my blood for the
         damn prophecy.

        Let's run as far from him as we can.²
        
         There's nowhere to run. And I'm certainly not moving in with my
         mother, if that's what you're implying.

        • No. He has to die. We have no choice.
        • No. This has to end here and now.

Dragonborn Then let's face him, together.

Serana • Thank you. Somehow I knew you'd understand.
        • If we head back to the castle and kick the front door in, we're going
          to be knee-deep in his friends. Let's head back to Isran and let him
          see what we've got first. I'm betting he'll lend us a sword or two.

[One can ask about Vyrthur's plan...]

Dragonborn Vyrthur was saying something about vampire blood and the bow...

Serana It sounds like...that's the last bit of the prophecy. The blood of a
        Daughter of Coldharbour can corrupt the bow.

        Can I use your blood, then?
        
         Sure...do you have any arrows, though? They would have to be of elven
         quality, I'd guess.

        You're a Daughter of Coldharbour.
        
         So I am. I guess we could use my blood. Do you have any arrows? Elven
         arrows. I'm not going to just bleed on any old thing.

         I'd like to treat some arrows with your blood.
         
          • Let's just get this over with.
          • I think you'll need to find some arrows, first. Only elven ones
            will work for this, remember?

         I'm not going to take your blood right now.
         
          Oh. All right, then.

Dragonborn Are you ready to do this?

Serana I don't think you can ever be ready to kill your parent. I'm doing my
        best to not think of him as my father anymore.

        That's a good way to be thinking.
        
         I hope so.

        Let me know if you need anything.
        
         We've got enough to worry about right now. You stay focused, and I'll
         worry about me.

        • Just...leave me alone for now. I'll be fine.

[One returns to Isran after exploring the Vale.]

Isran The bow...you have Auriel's Bow! I've heard it described in tales, but
       I could never have imagined its beauty.

Dragonborn We need your help, Isran.

Isran Indeed. The day hasn't been won while Harkon still walks Tamriel. But
       what of Serana? Can she be trusted to lift a blade against her own kind?
       Her own family?

Dragonborn I trust her to do the right thing.

Isran I suppose that's as much as I can hope for. Let me address the
       Dawnguard, and then we'll be off. The men deserve to know we've finally
       gained the upper hand. Everyone! Gather 'round! Come on then, we haven't
       got all day!

       For too long we've allowed these vampires to poison the night and kill
       our people! Now, we finally have the means to strike back! We now have
       Auriel's Bow. The gods themselves have favored us and we must answer
       with action. The time has come to finally put an end to Harkon and his
       unholy prophecy! We will march on their land and destroy those wretched
       abominations so they can no longer corrupt our world! This is our fight
       and this is our fate! This is the time of the Dawnguard!

Celann Kill the abominations!

Isran This is it!

Gunmar Send them to Oblivion!

Sorine Give him a crossbow bolt right between the eyes for me!

Durak The prophecy is no more!

Isran It's time we take the fight to their door. Gather your things and rest
       well, my friend. We meet outside Castle Volkihar.

[The Dawnguard assembles outside the vampires' castle. The hunters slay Modhna,
 Rargal, Namasur and Stalf, plus their beloved cohorts on the bridge. The
 fight moves into the dining hall, where the rest of the lesser vampires are
 put to the sword. Finally, it's time to visit the chapel.]

[Everyone returns to Volkihar to confront Harkon. Before finding him, some of
 the other vampires will comment on it. This is optional, but eh well.]

Garan Auriel's Bow. Well done, indeed.
Garan Find Lord Harkon. Let him know the time of the prophecy is at hand.

Ronthil I knew you would be victorious.
Ronthil Our lord will be most pleased, I'm sure. I knew you could do it.

Orthjolf All of Skyrim will tremble before us.
Orthjolf Don't keep our master waiting. Take him the bow immediately.

Feran You have the bow...
Feran I'm sure your reward will be great for ensuring our Lord's success.

Rargal Who'll need thralls when the very sun is at our mercy?
Rargal Go find Lord Harkon. Tell him of your success.

Vingalmo Auriel's power is ours!
Vingalmo I'm sure Lord Harkon will be most pleased with your efforts. Find
          him at once.

Fura Present the bow to Lord Harkon at once!

Hestla You've served us all well, friend.
Hestla Auriel's Bow is ours. Deliver it to Lord Harkon at once, so we can reap
        the benefits of this prophecy.

[The player and Serana find Harkon in the cathedral, where Molag Bal's blood
 shrine is. The Lord is waiting in his Vampire Lord form.]

Harkon • So, you've returned. Is your...pet keeping you entertained?
        • Serana, my darling. I see you still favor keeping a pet.

Serana You know why we're here.

Harkon Of course I do. You disappoint me, Serana. You've taken everything I've
        provided for you and thrown it all away for this

        • ...pathetic half-breed vampire.
        • ...pathetic being.

Serana Provided for me? Are you insane? You've destroyed our family. You've
        killed other vampires. All over some prophecy that we barely
        understand. No more. I'm done with you. You will not touch him.

[Harkon sees she's drawn her weapon.]

Harkon So, I see this dragon has fangs. Your voice drips with the venom of
        your mother's influence. How alike you've become.

Serana No... Because unlike her, I'm not afraid of you. Not anymore.

Harkon And you... It appears I have you to thank for turning my daughter
        against me. I knew it was only a matter of time before

        • your ambition outgrew your loyalty.
        • she'd return with hatred in her heart.

Dragonborn • Loyalty? You never intended to let me live.
            • Hatred born of your neglect.

Harkon A small price to pay for the betterment of our kind.

Dragonborn • You're an insult to our kind.
            • Your kind is a blight on this world.

Harkon • Oh, come now...spare me your notions of kinship. You've simply used
        Serana in an attempt to take away what should rightfully be mine.

        • Yes, yes. Always the noble vampire hunter. And what happens when
          you've slain me? Is Valerica next? Is Serana?

        I would never use Serana like that.²
        
         The vampire is eternal, and with immortality comes the revelation that
         these bonds never endure... It's fleeting, momentary at best.

        I would never harm Serana. She's too important to me.²
        
         Then my daughter is truly lost. She died the moment she accepted a
         mortal into her life.

        No, I'm here to prevent our annihilation.²
        
         Ah, I see you've been speaking to Valerica and she's convinced you
         that eternal night will plunge us into war with daytime dwellers. If
         only it were so. With the world in shadow, we would never tire, never
         weaken...more than a match for their pitiful armies.

        I'm only here to kill you.²
        
         I see. Interesting that you can set aside your morals when it suits
         you.

        This is about more than killing vampires.²
        
         Ah, of course. The prophecy. You've come here to stop me from taking
         Auriel's Bow and shrouding the world in darkness.

        The bow belongs to me now.²
        
         Finally, a trace of honesty in our little conversation. How does it
         feel to hold the fate of the vampire in your grasp? Exhilarating,
         isn't it?

        Enough of this!
        
         Yes, quite. I'm growing weary of speaking to you and my traitorous
         daughter. I'll give you a single chance to turn over the bow to me.
         There will not be a second.

         Never.
         
          Very well then, you leave me no choice!

         Very well. (Give Auriel's Bow)
         
          Pitiful. Simply pitiful. I expected more from the defiant fool that
          beguiled my daughter. No matter. Serana will sacrifice her blood for
          the sake of the prophecy, and I will feast upon yours in Molag Bal's
          honor!

        ...²
        
         Little patience for talk? Good. Let's end this!

        • Auriel's Bow will be mine!
        • I will darken the skies!

[Serana will give various lines during the ensuing fight.]

Serana Tough day for you!
Serana The bow! Use the bow!
Serana You can't hide from us!
Serana Sorry it had to be this way!
Serana This day was always coming!
Serana I still remember how to fight!

[They fight Harkon. When he retreats to the blood fountain to restore life,
 Auriel's Bow dispels his barrier like it's papier-mâché. Eventually, the
 coup de grace is dealt. Harkon collapses and melts by the altar.]

Harkon No...Serana...your own father...

Serana Well, now that's done.

Dragonborn What will you do now?

Serana I'm not sure.

        • I'll probably stay here, for as long as they'll let me. I think we
          can rebuild here. Make my family's legacy something more respectable.

        • I'll probably stay with the Dawnguard, for as long as they let me.
          They're respectable fighters, and I think they see the benefits of
          having a vampire on their side, now.

        Of course, if you've got any more adventures planned...

        I'd love to have you along.
        
         That's what I wanted to hear.

        I don't think they'll involve you.
        
         Suit yourself.

[Garan Marethi enters and sees the carnage and Harkon's bloody remains.]

Garan Lord Harkon, defeated. I never imagined I'd see the day. My lady, you
       have my deepest sympathies. I am sure this was not easy for you.

Serana He was out of control, Garan. It had to be done. I'm not happy about
        this. He...he was still my father. But I suppose my father really died
        a long time ago. This was just the end of something else.

Garan Of course, my dear. All will be well now.

[The questline has ended by this point, though some vampires will comment on
 the startling outcome.]

Garan My congratulations on defeating Harkon. Clearly, you are the superior
       vampire.

Fura Bloodmouth None can deny your power now.

Hestla No one will soon forget that you were the one to defeat Harkon.

Rargal My lord.

Vingalmo I am at your service, as always.

[Garan has extra dialogue.]

Dragonborn Something on your mind, Garan?

Garan Well, now that the Castle is yours, I was wondering. Would you be
       interested in having the passage to the Courtyard restored? Harkon
       clearly never cared much for it.

       See to it at once.
       
        It would be my pleasure.

       I don't care. Do as you like.
       
        Then I think I shall see to the repairs. Thank you for your time.

       Stop wasting my time, Garan.
       
        My apologies. I shall not trouble you with it again.

[After Harkon's demise, Isran walks into the cathedral.]

Isran It's over. He's dead, and the prophecy dies with him. I...I suppose this
       is difficult for you.

Serana I think my father really died a long time ago. This was just...the end
        of something else. I did what needed to be done. Nothing more.

Isran I think perhaps...I think you did more than that. You have my thanks.

[He turns to the player.]

Isran So, the beast is destroyed. Not only that, but Auriel's Bow is in safe
       hands. The Dawnguard will now be dedicated to safeguarding it, making
       sure that prophecy will never come to pass. You've served Skyrim well.
       Even with these vampires gone, the fight isn't completely over. Once
       we're settled back in at the fort, there will be more work to do. We'd
       be honored to have you join us.

[If one revisits Valerica in the Soul Cairn, the good news can be conveyed.]

Dragonborn Harkon is dead.

Valerica What? Are you certain?

Dragonborn He died by my hand.

Valerica Then I see nothing preventing my return to Tamriel. Allow me to
          gather some of my things and I'll head back to Castle Volkihar. And
          from the bottom of my heart, I thank you.

[After exiting the Cairn]

Dragonborn What will you do now?

Valerica Well, I think it's time I got back to my work as an alchemist. The
          Soul Cairn will offer a unique opportunity to continue my studies,
          and I intend to complete my research. In the meantime, if there are
          any potions you might need, feel free to help yourself.

Dragonborn Can you give me Bloodcursed Arrows?

Valerica I'm sorry, I don't feel comfortable giving them to you. I understand
          what you did for

          • my family,
          • Serana and for me,

          but the prophecy never sat well with me, and I don't want to be part
          of it. I'm sorry.

|

|

[When entering a city, the player is randomly accosted by masked weirdos.]

Cultist You there! You're the one they call Dragonborn?

         Yes, I am Dragonborn.
         
          Your lies fall on deaf ears, Deceiver. The True Dragonborn comes...
          You are but his shadow.

         The Greybeards seem to think so...
         
          Then it is too late. The lie has already taken root in the hearts of
          men. So we shall expose to them the falseness in their hearts by
          tearing out yours, Deceiver!

         I don't know what you're talking about.
         
          Your lies fall on deaf ears, Deceiver! We know you are the False
          Dragonborn! You shall not stand in the way of the true Dragonborn's
          return. He comes soon, and we shall offer him your heart!

         When Lord Miraak appears all shall bear witness. None shall stand to
         oppose him!

[After killing the belligerent freaks, one finds a note on their person that
 mentions they originated in Solstheim, using Windhelm's Northern Maiden to
 reach Skyrim. The player travels to that city's docks in search, finding
 Captain Gjalund Salt-Sage on his ship.]

Gjalund If you're looking for passage to Solstheim, too bad. I'm not going
         back there anymore.

         Are you the captain of the Northern Maiden?
         
          Sure. Yeah. That's me. Why? Who sent you?

          I was attacked by some cultists who came here on your ship.²
          
           Now hold on! That wasn't my fault...I didn't know they were going
           to attack anybody. I don't even know how I got here.

           How can you not know how you got here? You sailed here, right?
           
            (same as What happened? Why...)

         What happened? Why won't you go back?
         
          It's hard to explain. I remember those people with the masks coming
          on board, then... Next thing I remember, I was here and they were
          gone. That's not right, losing whole days like that. There's been
          something strange going on there for a while, but after this...I'm
          done. I'm not going back to Solstheim.

          Yes, you are. You're taking me to Solstheim.
          
           Have you been listening to me? I'm not going back there.

           I'll pay you double your usual rate. (Give 500 gold)
           
            • Well...a man's got to make a living, after all. Fine. We'll cast
              off immediately.

            • That's a tempting offer...when you actually have the gold, I
              might be willing to consider it.

           You owe me. Those cultists you brought here tried to kill me.
           (Persuade)² |
           
            • Alright, you have a point. Taking you back to find them is the
              least I can do. Besides, maybe you can put a stop to whatever's
              going on over there. I owe them a bit of payback myself.

            • Look, I'm sorry about your troubles, but I've got to look out
              for myself. I'm not going to risk it.

           People are trying to kill me. I'm not taking no for an answer.
           (Intimidate)² |
           
            • Hold on, now. I'm just a simple sailor. I never wanted to get
              mixed up in any of this. Alright, I'll take you. But we leave
              immediately.

            • Yeah, well, and I don't want them trying to kill me. So the
              answer is still no.

           I'll be back.
           
            Whatever you want. The answer isn't going to be any different later
            though.

         Solstheim? Where's that?
         
          Surprised you've never heard of it. It's an island northeast of here.
          Has a small dark elf town called Raven Rock and a handful of Nords
          living in Skaal Village. But I'm not going back there. There's
          something wrong with about that place.

[The player books passage and, after a few days, arrives at Raven Rock, the
 island's main port of call.]

Gjalund Well, here we are. This is Raven Rock. Can't say I'm all that glad to
         see it again. Good luck. Maybe you can figure out what's going on
         around here.

[A man, Adril Arano, approaches on the docks.]

Adril I don't recognize you, so I'll assume this is your first visit to Raven
       Rock, outlander. State your intentions.

       I'm looking for Miraak. Do you know him?²
       
        Miraak...I...I'm not sure that I do.

       Just looking for work.
       
        You've picked one of the worst places in Morrowind to do that, but suit
        yourself.

       None of your business.
       
        That's the kind of attitude that's going to land you in prison, but
        I'll let it go for now.

       Just remember, Raven Rock is sovereign territory of House Redoran. This
       is Morrowind, not Skyrim. While you're here you will be expected to
       abide by our laws. Any questions?

       You know who Miraak is?²
       
        I...I'm unsure. I swear I know the name, but cannot place it.

        Can you tell me anything about him?
        
         I don't think so. I'm not... The name has something to do with the
         Earth Stone, I think. But I'm not sure what.

       Why are you so suspicious of visitors?
       
        I have to be. As Second Councilor, the security of Raven Rock is my
        primary concern.

        Has security been an issue?
        
         This isn't exactly the city of Blacklight. We're on the frontier here,
         and we've had more than a fair share of troubles. After all we've been
         through together, I refuse to let Councilor Morvayn down.

         What do your titles mean?
         
          Councilor Morvayn is House Redoran's representative on Solstheim. As
          second councilor, it's my job to support him and make certain his
          rule is enforced.

         What is the city of Blacklight?
         
          Your ignorance of our homeland doesn't surprise me. It's the capital
          of Morrowind...been that way ever since Mournhold was sacked by the
          Argonians. I don't visit there often anymore, but we still get the
          occasional supply ship and visitors from there.

          The Argonians invaded Morrowind?
          
           Quite a while ago, yes. They cut a bloody swath across most of the
           southern region of Morrowind. Nobody seems certain why it
           happened...an attempt at expansion, revenge for the enslavement of
           their people or perhaps both. Whatever the case may be, thousands
           of Dunmer needlessly lost their lives and many more were exiled from
           their homeland.

       Raven Rock is purely a Dunmer settlement?
       
        Raven Rock started out as an Imperial settlement, but the Empire chose
        to abandon it just as my people were first setting foot here. They
        left the town in shambles...but when House Redoran took over, we turned
        it around and it became ours. And even if it's been a struggle to make
        this island livable, we're proud to call it home.

       Remember, we're watching you.

[One visits the Earth Shrine nearby -- it's a large stone that people've been
 building a structure around. The builders seem to be in some sort of trance,
 which would fit with the captain's talk of lost time. A wizard approaches.]

Neloth You there... You don't seem to be in quite the same state as the others
        here. Very interesting. May I ask what it is you're doing here?

Dragonborn I'm looking for someone named Miraak.

Neloth Miraak...Miraak... It sounds familiar, and yet I can't quite place...
        Oh. Wait, I recall. But that makes very little sense. Miraak's been
        dead for thousands of years.

Dragonborn What does that mean?

Neloth I'm not sure, but it is fascinating, isn't it? Perhaps it has some
        relation to what's going on here. Quite unexpected. I'm afraid I can't
        give you any answers. But there are ruins of an ancient temple of
        Miraak's toward the center of the island. If I were you, I'd look
        there.

        What are these people doing?
        
         Building something, clearly. And yet they don't seem to have much to
         say about it. I'm very interested to find out what happens when they
         finish.

        Have you tried to stop this?
        
         Certainly not! Doing so would interfere with whatever is going on, and
         I would be unable to see how this all turns out.

        What can you tell me about Morrowind?
        
         • When the city of Vivec was destroyed, it took decades for us to
           rebuild. We are still but a shadow of our glorious past, but some
           day we will rise again.

         • You are too young to remember the Nerevarine. He defeated Dagoth Ur
           and saved us all from the blight.

         • The ignorant think it is only a place of ash and lava. It had
           rolling green plains and swamps and verdant hills too.

         • It is the only place where silt striders can be found. Although I
           managed to transplant a few here when I arrived.

         • There is the big island of Vvardenfell, and the coastal mainland.
           House Telvanni has its properties on Vvardenfell. I've never been to
           the mainland myself.

         • It's the home of the dunmer. The lesser races call us dark elves. We
           built great works there, like Vivec and Ald'ruhn. Many of them are
           destroyed now, either by Red Mountain or the argonian invasion.

         • Red Mountain dominates the island. Every now and then ash and debris
           from an eruption land on our shores.

[With the tip received, one visits the island's central temple. Like the stone
 near Raven Rock, many disparate people are, trance-like, repairing the old
 temple.]

|

|

[In the middle of the arena-like courtyard, the player finds Frea, a Nord. She
 isn't laboring like the others.]

Frea You there. What brings you to this place? Why are you here?

Dragonborn Who are you?

Frea I am Frea of the Skaal. I am here to either save my people, or avenge
      them.

Dragonborn Save them from what?

Frea I am unsure. Something has taken control of most of the people of
      Solstheim. It makes them forget themselves, and work on these horrible
      creations that corrupt the Stones, the very land itself. My father Storn,
      our shaman, says Miraak has returned to Solstheim, but that is
      impossible.

Dragonborn This Miraak tried to have me killed.

Frea Then you and I both have reason to see what lies beneath us. Let us go.
      There is nothing more I can do here. The Tree Stone and my friends are
      beyond my help for now. We need to find a way into the temple below.

      What do you know about Miraak?
      
       His story is as old as Solstheim itself. He served the dragons before
       their fall from power, as most did. A priest in their order. But unlike
       most, he turned against them. He made his own path, and his actions cost
       him dearly. The stories say he sought to claim Solstheim for himself,
       and the dragons destroyed him for it.

      What is the Tree Stone?
      
       It is an ancient stone of power, a connection to the All-Maker. It
       represents one of the aspects of nature, a part of the All-Maker's
       creation. There are other stones around Solstheim. I fear for what has
       happened to them...

      Tell me of your people, the Skaal.
      
       We have lived on Solstheim for many generations. Our people are tied to
       the land itself. We try to serve the All-Maker, to live in balance with
       nature, instead of exploiting it as others would.

      You're here by yourself?
      
       There are few of us left unaffected by this curse. My father Storn, the
       shaman, protects them in the village. I fashioned an amulet to guard me
       against whatever has taken hold of the Skaal, but it is the only one of
       its kind. If I cannot find a way to save them, there is no hope for our
       people.

[Together, they enter the lower temple.]

Frea Are you ready to help me now? We should not delay. We should check these
      rooms for supplies before heading further into the temple. We must be
      careful in these ruins. Traps can be anywhere, and there will likely be
      many. Miraak was trying to take power here, and protect himself in the
      process.

[They enter an ancient chamber with skeletons in hanging cages.]

Frea I do not wish to imagine what kinds of things happened in this chamber.
      Who were the poor souls trapped in these cages? What tortures did they
      suffer at Miraak's hands? Was it in service to the dragons, or for his
      own purposes? Look up there. I think I see something. The stairs are
      knocked out. I have no doubt you can find your way up. You never know,
      you may find something of value up there. I shall look around. We can
      proceed when you are ready.

[If one uses a support beam to reach the isolated ledge]

Frea Impressive! Was it worth the effort?

[The two head deeper into the crypt, setting of a guillotine trap.]

Frea I am not going down there. It would be foolish to attempt it. You have a
      much better chance to make it through these traps. I have no doubt that
      lever turns the blades off. I shall wait here for now.

[One shuts off the dangerous impediment.]

Frea Thank you. Miraak took great pains to make it difficult to reach him, it
      seems. Let us hope that is the last of these traps.

[The continue toward the sanctum.]

Frea The evil of this place must be rooted out. I do not know what it is
      Miraak learned that gave him reason to turn on his masters. But his path
      seems to have been a cruel one. I wonder if we will find some answers to
      what happened so long ago.

[After awhile...]

Frea How much deeper can this be? I had been told that Miraak's power was
      great, but to have built so large a temple... It cannot be much further
      now. I feel it in my bones.

[After encountering a Word Wall, the chamber shakes.]

Frea Something feels wrong. Brace yourself!

[They kill the escaping draugr and find a key, leading into a hidden section
 of the temple.]

Frea Dead end? Impossible. There must be something more! Look around. I will
      let you know if I find anything in the dining area.

[The player uses a weird lever.]

Frea I knew it! A secret passage in the dining area just opened up. This must
      be it. Let us move quickly. 

[The room they find has gated stairways and grotesque statues.]

Frea I wonder if there is something here that tells the story of Miraak...
      Nothing but ruined books. I do not recognize this statuary. We passed by
      a few of them earlier, but they are becoming more frequent as we get
      further in. I do not like this place. It almost looks as if these statues
      will come to life at any moment. It looks like there is only one way to
      proceed. I leave the honor of pulling that handle to you. I do not want
      to put my hand anywhere near the mouth of that statue.

[They continue downward.]

Frea It is eerily quiet. I do not suspect that will be the case the further we
      go. Be on your guard.

[Deep in the heart of the temple is a massive statue-adorned stairway. The
 team slays the draugr guardians. Beyond is an ornate chamber housing only a
 large book.]

Frea There are dark magics at work here. Ready yourself. This book... It seems
      wrong, somehow. Here, yet...not. It may be what we seek.

[As one begins to read the Black Book, a mass of tentacles drags one into a
 dark, weird realm. Inside, a man in cultist garb is conversing with two weird 
 floating creatures. A subservient dragon seems to be nearby.]

Miraak The time comes soon when... What?

[He zaps the player, preventing them from attacking.]

Miraak Who are you to dare set foot here? Ah... You are Dragonborn. I can feel
        it. And yet... You have done little beyond killing a few dragons. You
        have no idea of the true power a Dragonborn can wield! Mul...Qah Diiv!
        This realm is beyond you. You have no power here. And it is only a
        matter of time before Solstheim is also mine. I already control the
        minds of its people. Soon they will finish building my temple, and I
        can return home. She can await my arrival with the rest of Tamriel.

[The creatures delay the player, letting Miraak fly away on the dragon. One
 is the forcefully ejected from the book.]

Frea What happened to you? You read the book and then... It seemed as though
      you were not really here. I could see you, but also see through you!

Dragonborn I'm not really sure. I saw Miraak on a dragon.

Frea Where? Where is he? Can we reach him? Can we kill him?

Dragonborn Somehow, reading this book took me to where he was.

Frea This is a dangerous thing, then. We should return to my village, and show
      this to my father. Perhaps Storn can make sense of what is going on.
      Come, there looks to be a way out through here.

|

|

[Everyone escapes out into the fresh air. The Wind Stone's glow is nearby.]

Frea You see that green light? That comes from the Wind Stone, where my
      people work against their will. They must be freed soon. My village is
      just ahead. Storn has used his magic to raise a barrier around it,
      protecting the few of us left. That the barrier is still there is a good
      sign.

[They reach the small village. In its center, a few people are meditating, and
 their energies are creating an overhead wind barrier.]

Frea Father! I have returned! There is yet hope!

Storn Frea! What news do you bring? Is there a way to free our people?

Frea No, but I have brought someone who has seen things... He has confirmed
      that Miraak is the one behind the suffering of our people.

Storn I feared that it would be so.

Frea But how is that possible? After all this time...

Storn I fear there is much we do not yet know.

Frea Please, tell Storn what has happened.

Storn So, you have seen things, yes? My magic grows weak, and so does the
       barrier around our village. Time is short. Tell me what you know.

       I've seen Miraak.
       
        Really? How?

       Miraak is behind what's happening to your people.
       
        How do you know this?

Dragonborn I read a book in Miraak's temple, and went somewhere. Miraak was
            there.

Storn The legends speak of that place. Terrible battles fought at the temple.
       The dragons burning it to the ground in rage. They speak also of
       something worse than dragons buried within. Difficult to imagine, but
       if true... It means what I feared has come to pass. Miraak was never
       truly gone, and now has returned. If you could go to this place and see
       him... Are you like Miraak? Are you Dragonborn?

       I am indeed Dragonborn.
       
        Then perhaps you are connected with him. The old tales say that he,
        too, was Dragonborn.

       Miraak did claim to be Dragonborn.
       
        That is what the stories say. You are Dragonborn as well, then. Perhaps
        you are connected.

Dragonborn What does it mean if we're both Dragonborn?

Storn I am unsure. It may mean that you could save us, or it may mean that you
       could bring about our destruction. But our time is running out. The few
       of us left free of control cannot protect ourselves for much longer.
       You must go to Saering's Watch. Learn there the Word Miraak learned long
       ago, and use that knowledge on the Wind Stone. You may be able to break
       the hold on our people there, and free them from control.

       What do you know about Miraak?
       
        Much of what was known has been lost to the ages. He was Dragonborn,
        and yet he served the dragons. A priest in their order, highly esteemed
        and very powerful. Then he turned against them, becoming something they
        feared. He was defeated long ago, but it seems he was never destroyed.

       What do you mean, free your people from control?
       
        Some dark influence wields power over them, forces them to forget
        themselves and act against their nature. At first it was only during
        the night, but now every moment is spent building some strange shrine
        around the Wind Stone. I believe if the shrine can be destroyed, the
        Skaal will be free once more.

       Why do I need to learn a Word of Power?
       
        Miraak is behind what's happening to our village, and so the knowledge
        he has gained as Dragonborn is at the heart of it. You are Dragonborn
        as well. You too can wield this power, perhaps to a better end.

       All-Maker shelter you.

[After getting part of the Bend Will Shout at the destination, one returns to
 the Wind Stone and uses it. The profane shrine crumbles, and a slimy Lurker
 appears for everyone to neutralize. Everyone returns to the village.]

Storn The air is different. We are safe, which means you have succeeded.

Dragonborn Your people are free.

Storn So it is. You have proven yourself an ally to the Skaal, and so the
       Skaal shall be allies to you.

Dragonborn What do we do now?

Storn If you have released the Wind Stone and broken the hold on my people,
       perhaps you can do the same for the rest of Solstheim. I doubt it will
       fully stop whatever Miraak is doing, but it may slow his progress.

Dragonborn That's not enough. I need to stop Miraak now.

Storn I cannot help with that. None here can. You will need the knowledge
       Miraak himself learned. You will need to learn more about this Black
       Book.

Dragonborn Tell me more about this book, then.

Storn Miraak had this? This does not look like something of the Dragon cult.
       It is a dark thing, unnatural. I would have nothing to do with it. But
       the Dark Elf Wizard, Neloth... He came to us sometime ago, asking about
       the Black Books. I believe he knows a great deal about them. Perhaps too
       much. Seek him to the south. Be cautious, Dragonborn. There is something
       else at work here.

|

|

 [This quest is just the player destroying the other shrines. There isn't much
 to speak of, unfortunately.]

|

|

[To the south is a gigantic house made from a Morrowind mushroom -- Neloth's
 private mansion, Tel Mithryn. Two people are outside, one practicing his
 spellcasting.]

Varona Why are you out here? Aren't you supposed to be in the tower assisting
        Master Neloth?

Talvas Why won't this summoning work? If you must know, I'm trying to get this
        Ash Guardian spell to work. Now let me concentrate. Besides, shouldn't
        you be worrying about the damage to the tower?

Varona Master Neloth has tasked Elynea with repairing the tower. Why aren't
        you doing this in the lab, where it would be safer for all of us?

Talvas The, uh...the lab is too small. Also, I need the ashy soil. Master
        Neloth knows what I'm doing. No need to bother him about it though.
        He's quite busy at the moment

Varona It's on your head if something goes wrong. Just let me get back inside
        first.

Talvas No Ash Guardian. Maybe the book has something.

[She notices the player is approaching.]

Varona We don't get many visitors. Is there something you need?

        What is this place?
        
         Tel Mithryn. It's the home of Master Neloth. You may have heard of
         him. He's a famous Telvanni wizard.

         He lives in a giant mushroom?
         
          In Morrowind, the Telvanni grow buildings from special fungus spores.
          Master Neloth grew one here to be his home. Don't ask me how.

         Are you one of Neloth's apprentices?
         
          No. Talvas is his apprentice. I'm his steward. I manage the day to
          day¹ affairs of Tel Mithryn.

        Who else lives here?
        
         Talvas is Master Neloth's apprentice. If you are interested in spells,
         he might be willing to sell you some. Elynea is our alchemist. She
         specializes in mushrooms and other types of fungus. Ulves runs the
         kitchens.

[One goes up to visit the famous wizard in the largest mushroom tower.]

Neloth You again? Didn't I see you in Raven Rock?

Dragonborn I hear you know where to find Black Books.

Neloth You refer to the tomes of esoteric knowledge that old Hermaeus Mora
        has scattered throughout the world? Is this somehow connected to your
        search for Miraak?

        I found a Black Book. I need to find more.
        
         Found one? Yes, and you read it, too, didn't you? Don't try to deny
         it, you've got the look. I can see it now. Dangerous knowledge is
         still knowledge and therefore useful. Usually turns out to be the most
         useful, in my experience.

        The Black Books have something to do with Hermaeus Mora?
        
         You didn't know? Hmm, I thought it was obvious. Hermaeus Mora has
         always tried to seduce mortals into his service with the lure of
         forbidden knowledge. Where the Black Books actually came from...no one
         really knows. Some appear to have been written far in the past, others
         might be from the future. Apparently time is more malleable if you're
         the Daedric Prince of fate and destiny.

        Who is Hermaeus Mora?
        
         If you have to ask that, you'd probably be best leaving his books to
         wiser heads than yours. Like all Daedric Princes, he's not to be
         trifled with. But he is subtler than most of his ilk, appropriate for
         the prince of knowledge and fate. Many scholars and loremasters have
         been ensnared by the lure of learning secrets that only Hermaeus Mora
         possesses. But don't worry. I have no intention of joining them in
         their endless search though the infinite halls of Apocrypha.

Dragonborn I have to know what Miraak knows if I want to stop him.

Neloth Now that is a dangerous path indeed. Hermaeus Mora gives nothing away
        for free. You may end up like Miraak, of course. Two power-mad
        Dragonborn. It could be very interesting.

Dragonborn Do you know where I can find another Black Book?

Neloth Oh yes. They're not hard to locate once you know how to look for them.
        I have one here that I've been using to locate more.

Dragonborn You have a Black Book?

Neloth Yes. I haven't been idle while this fascinating madness engulfed
        Solstheim. But my book isn't what you're looking for. I'm quite sure
        it's unconnected with this Miraak. But I do know where to find a Black
        Book that can help you.

        So you know where to find this Black Book? The one connected with
        Miraak? |
        
         Yes, I do. I haven't been able to get it, though. But maybe together
         we can unlock the secrets the Dwemer left behind.

          The Dwemer? What do they have to do with this?
          
           Forbidden knowledge was somewhat of a specialty of the dwarves, eh?
           You don't think they would just leave it alone, do you?

          Just tell me where the book is and I'll go get it.
          
           I'm afraid it isn't that simple. If it was, I would have the book
           already.

          It seems the ancient Dwemer discovered this book and took it to
          study. I found their reading room in the ruins of Nchardak. The
          book is there, but it's sealed in a protective case which I wasn't
          able to open. But perhaps the two of us together will be able to get
          at the book. To Nchardak, then. Follow me.

        Why won't the book you have here help me?
        
         Oh, it is clearly not associated with the same power that has
         overtaken the island. And I'm not talking about Hermaeus Mora. These
         Black Books are all his, of course. No, what you're looking for is a
         specific book. Presumably because Miraak's power derives from it.

[Neloth takes the player to the seaside Dwemer ruins.]

Neloth The Dwemer certainly know how to build for the ages. These towers have
        outlasted their creators by millenia¹. The book is housed inside that
        dome. I'll need to unlock the door for us. Let's get on with it.

[Reaver bandits attack.]

Neloth I had to clean out the riff-raff last time I was here, too. Where do
        they come from?

[They finally slay the outdoor assailants and approach the locked entrance.]

Neloth The Dwemer of Nchardak appear to have been fond of these control
        pedestals. Luckily I found a cube to operate it inside on my last
        visit. I sealed the door when I left to keep out ignorant meddlers.
        Let me unlock it. The book is just inside.

[The two visit inside. The target item is visible in the floor, under a thick
 protective cover.]

Neloth You can see the book right there. So tantalizingly close...but trust
        me, no magic will open that. I'd have had the book already if it could.
        No, we'll have to do this the hard way. If we can restore the steam
        supply to this room, I'm certain I can open it. As you'll see, that's
        easier said than done. This way to the boilers. Follow me.

[The elevator takes them into the desolate, flooded boiler room.]

Neloth The last time I was here, I only explored a small portion of the ruins.
        I was here alone then, and I find an assistant is absolutely essential
        for this kind of dirty, dangerous work. Nchardak. The City of a
        Hundred Towers. In its day, it was the largest of the great Dwemer
        Archives, and perhaps the most advanced. In the old stories, when the
        Nords came to conquer it, it's said the Dwemer submerged the entire
        city beneath the sea until the invaders gave up. I have my doubts. But
        the city was a marvel of Dwemer engineering. Now...reduced to this. As
        you can see, most of the lower levels of the city are flooded. But it
        isn't hopeless -- the old Dwemer pumps still seem to work. Watch.

[He uses a control pedestal, draining part of the room.]

Neloth But the pumps only operate when a cube is in the pedestal. And
        unfortunately, I only have one cube. These four boilers provide steam
        to the room upstairs. They're shut down, but they still respond to the
        control cubes. So, if we can find four more cubes, we can turn these
        boilers back on and restore steam power to the room upstairs. Then I
        should be able to open the book's protective case. Bring that cube.
        We'll need it.

[One takes the cube and visits Neloth at an old Dwemer control panel.]

Neloth Yes...here we are. This device shows the location of four more cubes
        in this section of the city. It looks like most of the cubes were moved
        to the lower levels; perhaps to try to control the flooding before the
        city was abandoned. Interesting. That would suggest that the city must
        have originally sunk during the first cataclysm of Red Mountain. Or
        that the Dwemer's servitors continued to try to preserve the city after
        their creators' disappearance.

[He stops at a door.]

Neloth Three of the cubes are through here. This seems like a sensible place
        to start. You should be able to unseal this door with the control cube
        I gave you.

[They enter the adjacent workshop. A cube is sitting a few steps away.]

Neloth I hope the rest of the cubes arethis easy to find. Although knowing the
        Dwemer, I rather doubt it.

[A long, half-flooded chamber is nearby.]

Neloth These must be the Great Workshops of Nchardak. Impressive even in
        ruins. In the city's days of glory, it was reputed to be able to
        assemble a complete automaton in a single day. Much of the Dwemer army
        at the Battle of Red Mountain must have come from here. It looks like
        we'll need to lower the water level to make any more progress.

[Using the cubes, the room is drained.]

Neloth Ah, good. Now we can see if we can find a way to get that next cube.

[Some Centurions come to life.]

Neloth There seems to be an inexhaustible suply of these Dwemer contraptions.

[They claim a third cube still in use.]

Neloth Unfortunately, each cube we retrieve shuts down the corresponding
        pumps, raising the water level. We'll have to be careful.

[They end up reflooding the room, gaining access to a broken passage.]

Neloth Let's see where this leads. With the water level this high, we can swim
        right across the collapsed part of the passage and reach the other
        side.

[Soon after, they find another cube.]

Neloth Very good. By my count, we've found a total of four cubes. Assuming
        you haven't dropped any anywhere.

[They return to the first area of the boilery.]

Neloth You'll need to lower the water level before we can proceed any further.

[Soon, it's time to visit the aqueduct.]

Neloth The last cube is somewhere in here. I hope it won't require more
        swimming around in this filth. I'd guess that must be the pump
        activator up there. But how to reach it? We'll need to get all three
        of these bridges down in order to reach the pump control.

[The player fiddles with the cube controls.]

Neloth That's it! Don't touch anything else. Quickly now.

[They kill some automatons.]

Neloth What a mess. I'm getting tired of wading around in this muck. I have
        an idea. I'll wait here and retrieve this cube once you find the last
        one we need. Good luck!

[Nearby, one retrieves the last cube from its booby-trapped pedestal.]

Neloth Do you have the cube? Good, good! Then I'll take this cube and we can
        be on our way. Watch out. The water's rising even higher with both
        pumps shut down. That was easier than I expected. I'm glad you were
        here to do all the hard work. With the cube I retrieved from the
        pumping pedestal, we should now have five cubes -- exactly what we
        need. Now we can finally see about getting those boilers started.

[For the last time, everyone returns to Nchardak's boilery.]

Neloth You'll need the cube I picked up to start all the boilers. Here, I
        picked this up this cube for you.

[All boilers are put back in action.]

Neloth That seems to have done it. Good. It took longer than I'd hoped, but
        at least it's finally done. Look out, another Steam Centurion!

[They kill the final foe.]

Neloth I'm going to head back upstairs and see if the reading room has steam.
        If so, it should be a simple matter to release the book.

[Everyone travels upstairs.]

Neloth Yes, it worked! The steam is flowing. Now it should be as simple as...
        That should do it.

[The case recedes and the book rises up into plain view.]

Neloth At last. I hope it was worth it. Please...be my guest. You deserve the
        first look. Besides, it could be very dangerous. These books are known
        to drive many people insane.

|

|

[The player opens Nchardak's Black Book...]

Neloth Oh good. Be sure to say hello to Hermaeus Mora for me, if you see him.

[...and is warped back to Hermaeus Mora's plane of Oblivion, filled with black
 goop and vast libraries. This time, the Daedric Prince himself appears as a
 giant tentacle monster with eyes everywhere. His dialogue will change if one
 previously completed his Discerning the Transmundane quest.]

Hermaeus Mora • So, another seeker after knowledge enters my realm.
               • I know you, champion. The Oghma Infinium was only the
                 beginning.

               This is Apocrypha, where all knowledge is hoarded.

               • Perhaps you will prove clever enough to uncover the secrets
                 hidden here. If so, welcome. Perhaps you are a fool or a
                 coward. If so, you are in peril. Read your book again and
                 escape before Apocrypha claims you forever.

               • Sate your thirst for knowledge in the endless stacks of my
                 library. If you tire of your search, read your book again to
                 return to your mortal life. For a time. The lure of Apocrypha
                 will call you back. It is your fate.

[The player navigates the book's chapters to reach the end.]

Hermaeus Mora • All seekers of knowledge come to me, sooner or later.
               • Well done, my champion. Your journey towards enlightenment
                 has finally lead you here, to my realm, as I knew it would.

               Who are you?²
               
                I am Hermaeus Mora, the Gardener of Men, knower of the unknown,
                master of fates. You stand in my realm, mortal.

               What do you want of me? / What do you want of me this time?²
               
                You have entered my realm. You have sought out the forbidden
                knowledge that only one other has obtained. You are Dragonborn,
                like Miraak before you. A seeker of knowledge and power.

               What do you want me of this time, my lord?²
               
                Your progress since obtaining my Oghma Infinium has been rapid.
                And now, I find you here, following in my servant Miraak's
                footsteps. You also are Dragonborn. You also seek how to bend
                the world to your will.

               Don't worry, I was just leaving.²
               
                No. Not yet. I have watched your progress through my realm with
                growing interest. You are following in the footsteps of my
                servant, Miraak. Like him, you are Dragonborn, and seek the
                power that is your birthright.

                Yes, I came here to learn Miraak's secrets.
                
                 All that he knows he learned from me.

                I won't serve you, monster. I just want to defeat Miraak.
                
                 You will serve me, willing or not. All who seek after the
                 secrets of the world are my servants.

                I don't need your help. I'll learn Miraak's secrets on my own.
                
                 No. Look around you. You have done nothing here on your own.
                 You could spend a hundred lifetimes searching my library, and
                 you will never find what you seek.

               I know what you want to use your power as Dragonborn to bend
               the world to your will. Here then is the knowledge you need,
               although you did not know you needed it. The second Word of
               Power. Use it to bend the will of mortals to your purpose. But
               this is not enough. Miraak knows the final Word of Power.
               Without that, you cannot hope to surpass him. Miraak served me
               well, and was rewarded. I can grant you the same power as he
               wields, but all knowledge has its price.

               So what's your price for the final Word of Power?
               
                Knowledge for knowledge.

               Tell me what you want, my lord, and I will bring it to you.²
               
                You please me, champion. Your loyalty will be richly rewarded.

               The Skaal have withheld their secrets from me for many long
               years. The time has come for this knowledge to be added to my
               library.

                I will talk to the Skaal and bring you their secrets.
                
                 I know you will. And then I will give you the knowledge that
                 you seek.

                I will do as you command, my lord.
                
                 Yes, I know. And then Miraak's power will be yours as well.

                What if the Skaal refuse to give up their secrets?
                
                 My servant Miraak would have found a way to bring me what I
                 want. So will you, if you wish to surpass him.

                How do I know I can trust you, demon?
                
                 My word is as true as fate, as inevitable as destiny. Bring me
                 what I want, and I will give you what you seek.

               Why do I need this Word of Power to defeat Miraak?
               
                Even dragons submit to Miraak's Voice. Without that power, you
                cannot face him. So say I, Hermaeus Mora, master of the tides
                of Fate.

               Isn't Miraak your ally? Why help me defeat him?
               
                He has served me long and well. But he grows restless under my
                guidance. His desire to return to your world will spread my
                influence more widely. But it will also set him free from my
                direct control. It may be time to replace him with a more loyal
                servant. One who still appreciates the gifts that I have to
                offer.

               Send the Skaal shaman to me. He holds the secrets that will be
               mine.

[The player finally exits the book, being transported back to Nchardak.]

Neloth What happened? What did you see? Different people have very different
        experiences when reading these books.

        I talked to Hermaeus Mora.
        
         You're still surprisingly sane, too. What did he have to say? He must
         have wanted something from you.

        I learned the second Word of the Bend Will Shout.
        
         No wonder the Dwemer were so interested in that book. It was indeed
         one that Miraak used to advance his power as Dragonborn. But I assume
         there's some bad news. It would be unlike Hermaeus Mora to allow
         anyone to gain such knowledge without exacting a price.

Dragonborn He wants the secrets of the Skaal in exchange for teaching me
            the third Word.

Neloth Hmph. What secrets could they have worth keeping from old Mora? Sounds
        like a bargain to me. Hermaeus Mora learns some fascinating new ways to
        skin a horker, and you become the second most powerful Dragonborn that
        ever lived. Well, that gives me a lot to think about. I need to get
        back to Tel Mithryn. I have some ideas about how to locate more of
        these Black Books...

[With the sojourn over, the player exits outside, finding a dragon waiting.]

Krosulhah When Miraak returns, all will bow before him!

[They kill the dragon, but a projection of Miraak appears, taking the soul.]

Miraak This dragon's soul belongs to me. One step closer to my return.

[After, it's back to Skaal Village to find Storn.]

Dragonborn I spoke to Hermaeus Mora. He asked for the secrets of the Skaal.

Storn Hermaeus Mora...old Herma-Mora himself. So he is the source of Miraak's
       power. Of course. We have many tales of Herma-Mora trying to trick us
       into giving up our secrets to him. And now he comes again for what we
       have long kept from him.

       He said that's the only way he'll teach me the final Word of Miraak's
       Shout. |
       
        So it falls to me to be the one to give up our secrets to our ancient
        enemy. I do not know if I have the strength to face him. The Tree Stone
        is still corrupted...the land is still out of balance. But with the
        other five restored...it may be enough. It will have to be.

        You mean you'll give him what he wants?
        
         Yes. The Skaal also tell of the day when we must finally give up our
         secrets. When Herma-Mora finally wins. As shaman, it is my duty to
         guard these secrets, but also to decide when it is necessary to give
         them up. I believe that time is now. If I am wrong, may my ancestors
         forgive me. Give me the book. I will read it, and speak to old
         Herma-Mora myself. I will make sure he lives up to his part of the
         bargain.

       What are the secrets of the Skall?
       
        Ancient lore, handed down from shaman to shaman since the All-Maker
        first gave Solstheim to the Skaal. How to talk to the wind, how to
        listen to the earth -- these are our secrets. Nothing of power or
        mastery.

        Why would Hermaeus Mora want your secrets?
        
         We know him as Herma-Mora, the Demon of Knowledge. It is in his nature
         to hoard secrets for himself. Their value to him is of no consequence.
         The very fact that the Skaal have kept knowledge from him has merely
         increased his desire to have it.

       Herma-Mora? Why do you call him that?
       
        That is our name for him -- the Demon of Knowledge. He has always been
        our enemy.

Dragonborn I hope you know what you're doing. (Give book)

Storn That is my hope as well. I am trusting that you will make this sacrifice
       worthwhile.

Frea Father, you must not do this. That book is...wrong. Evil. Against
      everything that you have taught me my whole life.

Storn I must, Frea. It is the only way to free Solstheim forever from Miraak's
       shadow. There comes a time when everything must change. Nothing that
       lives remains the same forever. Do not fear for me, my daughter. This is
       the destiny that the All-Maker has laid out for me.

Frea I stand beside you, father, as always.

Storn I am ready for whatever the foul master of this book has in store for
       me.

[He opens the book; dark tendrils dig into his mind as Herma-Mora manifests.]

Hermaeus Mora At last, the Skaal yield up their secrets to me.

Frea Father! No, stop! 

Storn You...liar...gah!...I won't...not...for you...

Frea Do something!

Hermaeus Mora Dragonborn, you have delivered me the gift I requested. In
               return, I keep my promise, as befits a Prince of Oblivion I
               give you the Word of Power that you need to challenge Miraak.
               You will be either a worthy opponent or his successor, as the
               tides of fate decree.

Storn Nooo...

[Storn crumples to the floor, dead. Herma-Mora disappears.]

Frea Father! What have you done? Go. My father sacrificed himself so that you
      could destroy Miraak and lift his master's shadow from the land. Go,
      then. Kill Miraak. Do not fail.

[The other Skaal come to pay their respects at the body.]

Fanari Strong-Voice Goodbye, old friend. We will miss you, but do not worry.
                     Frea will guide us well, thanks to you.

Edla We won't forget what you did for us, Storn Crag-Strider. Walk with the
      All-Maker.

Deor Woodcutter Frea...I'm sorry.

Aeta It can't be...please, All-Maker, send him back to us...

Finna May the All-Maker guide your soul to the next life.

Nikulas Frea...what happened? What was that thing? I thought the village was
         safe now.

Wulf Wild-Blood Return to the All-Maker, old one. The Skaal will never forget
                 your sacrifice.

Morwen I don't really understand what you did, but I trust you did it for the
        good of the village. So...thank you.

Tharstan By the gods...I've never seen anything like it...I, uh...I don't
          think this will go in my book.

[With the full Thu'um attained, one reads the Waking Dreams book to reenter
 Hermaeus Mora's realm. With its nightmarish libraries navigated, one finds a
 Word Wall. Miraak's dragon Sahrotaar is nearby, and easily falls prey to the
 Bend Will Shout.]

Sahrotaar Hail, thuri. Your thu'um has the mastery. Climb aboard and I will
           carry you to Miraak.

[The player hangs on as Sahrotaar heads for a distant, isolated tower.]

Sahrotaar Beware. Miraak is strong. He knew you would come here.

[They land on the tower. The enemy Dragonborn is patiently waiting.]

Miraak Sahrotaar, are you so easily swayed?

[Sahrotaar talks again.]

Miraak No. Not yet. We should greet our guest first. And so the First
        Dragonborn meets the Last Dragonborn at the summit of Apocrypha. No
        doubt just as Hermaeus Mora intended. He is a fickle master, you know.
        But now I will be free of him. My time in Apocrypha is over. You are
        here in your full power, and thus subject to my full power. You will
        die. And with the power of your soul, I will return to Solstheim and
        be master of my own fate once again. Kruziikrel! Relonikiv! Now!

[Miraak's other two dragons appear, and Sahrotaar flies off to fight them.]

Miraak So easily you betray me, after all these years.

[When weakened, Miraak calls to his dragon...]

Miraak Kruziikrel, ziil los dii du!

[...and steals its soul when it lands. He repeats this for his other helper.]

Miraak Relonikiv, ziil los dii du!

[He regains his health yet again.]

Miraak Fate decreed that you had to die so that I could win my freedom.

[Finally, he calls his final dragon to its demise.]

Miraak Sahrotaar, ziil los dii du!

[Finally, after all Miraak's embarrassing shenanigans, Hermaeus Mora stops him
 mid-teleport and raises him into the air.]

Hermaeus Mora Did you think to escape me, Miraak? You can hide nothing from me
               here. No matter. I have found a new Dragonborn to serve me.

Miraak May he be rewarded for her service as I am!

[Herma-Mora's tentacle impales him, slaying him permanently.]

Hermaeus Mora Miraak harbored fantasies of rebellion against me. Learn from
               his example. Serve me faithfully, and you will continue to be
               richly rewarded.

[With the threat to Solstheim averted, the player returns triumphant. That
 ends the questline properly. If one revisits Skaal Village]

Frea I can feel it. The Tree Stone is free again. The Oneness of the land is
      is restored. Does that mean...is it over? Is Miraak defeated?

      It's over. Miraak is dead.
      
       Then my father's sacrifice...it was not in vain. He died to free us.
       Tell me...was it the only way? Did he need to die?

       I couldn't have defeated Miraak without Storn's help.
       
        Then...it was the All-Maker's will, as he said. I know I should not
        doubt it. But it is good to hear, all the same. Thank you.

       Hermaeus Mora killed Storn, remember. Not Miraak.
       
        I know. The Skaal will not forget this. Storn's death will become
        another of the many tales of Herma-Mora's treachery.

       Hermaeus Mora wouldn't have helped me without Storn's sacrifice.
       
        Yes, his help which did not require him to kill my father. Such is
        the way of Herma-Mora, the eternal enemy of the Skaal.

      Storn didn't die for nothing. Miraak will never threaten Solstheim again.
      
       Thank you. Whatever your other reasons for acting, you have done the
       Skaal a great service. We will not forget what you've done.

      I killed Miraak. But Hermaeus Mora is still out there.
      
       It was Miraak who threatened Solstheim. With him gone, Herma-Mora has
       been foiled once again. Tell me, though...my father's death...was it
       necessary? Was there no other way to destroy Miraak?

      One more thing, Skaal-friend, if you will. I know it is not my place,
      but...may I offer a word of advice...of warning?

      Sure, what is it?
      
       As shaman of the Skaal, I am charged with the spiritual well-being of
       my people. While you are not of the Skaal, you are Skall-friend, and so
       I give you this warning. Herma-Mora forced you to serve him in order to
       defeat Miraak. Do not let him lure you further down that path. The
       All-Maker made you Dragonborn for a higher purpose. Do not forget that.
       Walk with the All-Maker, Skaal-friend.

      I don't need your advice.
      
       I understand. Walk with the All-Maker, Dragonborn.

[If one revisits Neloth to update him about the goings-on]

Neloth Hold still. Let me get a good look at you.

Dragonborn What are you looking for?

Neloth Incipient madness. Loss of self-awareness. Black spots in the whites

High up, crowning the grassy summit of a swelling mound whose sides are wooded near the base with the gnarled trees of the primeval forest, stands the old chateau of my ancestors. For centuries its lofty battlements have frowned down upon the wild and rugged countryside about, serving as a home and stronghold for the proud house whose honoured line is older even than the moss-grown castle walls. These ancient turrets, stained by the storms of generations and crumbling under the slow yet mighty pressure of time, formed in the ages of feudalism one of the most dreaded and formidable fortresses in all France. From its machicolated parapets and mounted battlements Barons, Counts, and even Kings had been defied, yet never had its spacious halls resounded to the footsteps of the invader.
     But since those glorious years all is changed. A poverty but little above the level of dire want, together with a pride of name that forbids its alleviation by the pursuits of commercial life, have prevented the scions of our line from maintaining their estates in pristine splendour; and the falling stones of the walls, the overgrown vegetation in the parks, the dry and dusty moat, the ill-paved courtyards, and toppling towers without, as well as the sagging floors, the worm-eaten wainscots, and the faded tapestries within, all tell a gloomy tale of fallen grandeur. As the ages passed, first one, then another of the four great turrets were left to ruin, until at last but a single tower housed the sadly reduced descendants of the once mighty lords of the estate.
     It was in one of the vast and gloomy chambers of this remaining tower that I, Antoine, last of the unhappy and accursed Comtes de C——, first saw the light of day, ninety long years ago. Within these walls, and amongst the dark and shadowy forests, the wild ravines and grottoes of the hillside below, were spent the first years of my troubled life. My parents I never knew. My father had been killed at the age of thirty-two, a month before I was born, by the fall of a stone somehow dislodged from one of the deserted parapets of the castle; and my mother having died at my birth, my care and education devolved solely upon one remaining servitor, an old and trusted man of considerable intelligence, whose name I remember as Pierre. I was an only child, and the lack of companionship which this fact entailed upon me was augmented by the strange care exercised by my aged guardian in excluding me from the society of the peasant children whose abodes were scattered here and there upon the plains that surround the base of the hill. At the time, Pierre said that this restriction was imposed upon me because my noble birth placed me above association with such plebeian company. Now I know that its real object was to keep from my ears the idle tales of the dread curse upon our line, that were nightly told and magnified by the simple tenantry as they conversed in hushed accents in the glow of their cottage hearths.
     Thus isolated, and thrown upon my own resources, I spent the hours of my childhood in poring over the ancient tomes that filled the shadow-haunted library of the chateau, and in roaming without aim or purpose through the perpetual dusk of the spectral wood that clothes the side of the hill near its foot. It was perhaps an effect of such surroundings that my mind early acquired a shade of melancholy. Those studies and pursuits which partake of the dark and occult in Nature most strongly claimed my attention.
     Of my own race I was permitted to learn singularly little, yet what small knowledge of it I was able to gain, seemed to depress me much. Perhaps it was at first only the manifest reluctance of my old preceptor to discuss with me my paternal ancestry that gave rise to the terror which I ever felt at the mention of my great house; yet as I grew out of childhood, I was able to piece together disconnected fragments of discourse, let slip from the unwilling tongue which had begun to falter in approaching senility, that had a sort of relation to a certain circumstance which I had always deemed strange, but which now became dimly terrible. The circumstance to which I allude is the early age at which all the Comtes of my line had met their end. Whilst I had hitherto considered this but a natural attribute of a family of short-lived men, I afterward pondered long upon these premature deaths, and began to connect them with the wanderings of the old man, who often spoke of a curse which for centuries had prevented the lives of the holders of my title from much exceeding the span of thirty-two years. Upon my twenty-first birthday, the aged Pierre gave to me a family document which he said had for many generations been handed down from father to son, and continued by each possessor. Its contents were of the most startling nature, and its perusal confirmed the gravest of my apprehensions. At this time, my belief in the supernatural was firm and deep-seated, else I should have dismissed with scorn the incredible narrative unfolded before my eyes.
     The paper carried me back to the days of the thirteenth century, when the old castle in which I sat had been a feared and impregnable fortress. It told of a certain ancient man who had once dwelt on our estates, a person of no small accomplishments, though little above the rank of peasant; by name, Michel, usually designated by the surname of Mauvais, the Evil, on account of his sinister reputation. He had studied beyond the custom of his kind, seeking such things as the Philosopher's Stone, or the Elixir of Eternal Life, and was reputed wise in the terrible secrets of Black Magic and Alchemy. Michel Mauvais had one son, named Charles, a youth as proficient as himself in the hidden arts, and who had therefore been called Le Sorcier, or the Wizard. This pair, shunned by all honest folk, were suspected of the most hideous practices. Old Michel was said to have burnt his wife alive as a sacrifice to the Devil, and the unaccountable disappearances of many small peasant children were laid at the dreaded door of these two. Yet through the dark natures of the father and the son ran one redeeming ray of humanity; the evil old man loved his offspring with fierce intensity, whilst the youth had for his parent a more than filial affection.
     One night the castle on the hill was thrown into the wildest confusion by the vanishment of young Godfrey, son to Henri the Comte. A searching party, headed by the frantic father, invaded the cottage of the sorcerers and there came upon old Michel Mauvais, busy over a huge and violently boiling cauldron. Without certain cause, in the ungoverned madness of fury and despair, the Comte laid hands on the aged wizard, and ere he released his murderous hold his victim was no more. Meanwhile joyful servants were proclaiming the finding of young Godfrey in a distant and unused chamber of the great edifice, telling too late that poor Michel had been killed in vain. As the Comte and his associates turned away from the lowly abode of the alchemists, the form of Charles Le Sorcier appeared through the trees. The excited chatter of the menials standing about told him what had occurred, yet he seemed at first unmoved at his father's fate. Then, slowly advancing to meet the Comte, he pronounced in dull yet terrible accents the curse that ever afterward haunted the house of C——.

May ne'er a noble of thy murd'rous line
Survive to reach a greater age than thine!

spake he, when, suddenly leaping backwards into the black wood, he drew from his tunic a phial of colourless liquid which he threw into the face of his father's slayer as he disappeared behind the inky curtain of the night. The Comte died without utterance, and was buried the next day, but little more than two and thirty years from the hour of his birth. No trace of the assassin could be found, though relentless bands of peasants scoured the neighbouring woods and the meadow-land around the hill.
     Thus time and the want of a reminder dulled the memory of the curse in the minds of the late Comte's family, so that when Godfrey, innocent cause of the whole tragedy and now bearing the title, was killed by an arrow whilst hunting, at the age of thirty-two, there were no thoughts save those of grief at his demise. But when, years afterward, the next young Comte, Robert by name, was found dead in a nearby field from no apparent cause, the peasants told in whispers that their seigneur had but lately passed his thirty-second birthday when surprised by early death. Louis, son to Robert, was found drowned in the moat at the same fateful age, and thus down through the centuries ran the ominous chronicle; Henris, Roberts, Antoines, and Armands snatched from happy and virtuous lives when little below the age of their unfortunate ancestor at his murder.
     That I had left at most but eleven years of further existence was made certain to me by the words which I read. My life, previously held at small value, now became dearer to me each day, as I delved deeper and deeper into the mysteries of the hidden world of black magic. Isolated as I was, modern science had produced no impression upon me, and I laboured as in the Middle Ages, as wrapt as had been old Michel and young Charles themselves in the acquisition of daemonological and alchemical learning. Yet read as I might, in no manner could I account for the strange curse upon my line. In unusually rational moments, I would even go so far as to seek a natural explanation, attributing the early deaths of my ancestors to the sinister Charles Le Sorcier and his heirs; yet having found upon careful inquiry that there were no known descendants of the alchemist, I would fall back to occult studies, and once more endeavour to find a spell that would release my house from its terrible burden. Upon one thing I was absolutely resolved. I should never wed, for since no other branches of my family were in existence, I might thus end the curse with myself.
     As I drew near the age of thirty, old Pierre was called to the land beyond. Alone I buried him beneath the stones of the courtyard about which he had loved to wander in life. Thus was I left to ponder on myself as the only human creature within the great fortress, and in my utter solitude my mind began to cease its vain protest against the impending doom, to become almost reconciled to the fate which so many of my ancestors had met. Much of my time was now occupied in the exploration of the ruined and abandoned halls and towers of the old chateau, which in youth fear had caused me to shun, and some of which, old Pierre had once told me, had not been trodden by human foot for over four centuries. Strange and awesome were many of the objects I encountered. Furniture, covered by the dust of ages and crumbling with the rot of long dampness, met my eyes. Cobwebs in a profusion never before seen by me were spun everywhere, and huge bats flapped their bony and uncanny wings on all sides of the otherwise untenanted gloom.
     Of my exact age, even down to days and hours, I kept a most careful record, for each movement of the pendulum of the massive clock in the library told off so much more of my doomed existence. At length I approached that time which I had so long viewed with apprehension. Since most of my ancestors had been seized some little while before they reached the exact age of Comte Henri at his end, I was every moment on the watch for the coming of the unknown death. In what strange form the curse should overtake me, I knew not; but I was resolved, at least, that it should not find me a cowardly or a passive victim. With new vigour I applied myself to my examination of the old chateau and its contents.
     It was upon one of the longest of all my excursions of discovery in the deserted portion of the castle, less than a week before that fatal hour which I felt must mark the utmost limit of my stay on earth, beyond which I could have not even the slightest hope of continuing to draw breath, that I came upon the culminating event of my whole life. I had spent the better part of the morning in climbing up and down half-ruined staircases in one of the most dilapidated of the ancient turrets. As the afternoon progressed, I sought the lower levels, descending into what appeared to be either a mediaeval place of confinement, or a more recently excavated storehouse for gunpowder. As I slowly traversed the nitre-encrusted passageway at the foot of the last staircase, the paving became very damp, and soon I saw by the light of my flickering torch that a blank, water-stained wall impeded my journey. Turning to retrace my steps, my eye fell upon a small trap-door with a ring, which lay directly beneath my feet. Pausing, I succeeded with difficulty in raising it, whereupon there was revealed a black aperture, exhaling noxious fumes which caused my torch to sputter, and disclosing in the unsteady glare the top of a flight of stone steps. As soon as the torch, which I lowered into the repellent depths, burned freely and steadily, I commenced my descent. The steps were many, and led to a narrow stone-flagged passage which I knew must be far underground. The passage proved of great length, and terminated in a massive oaken door, dripping with the moisture of the place, and stoutly resisting all my attempts to open it. Ceasing after a time my efforts in this direction, I had proceeded back some distance toward the steps, when there suddenly fell to my experience one of the most profound and maddening shocks capable of reception by the human mind. Without warning, I heard the heavy door behind me creak slowly open upon its rusted hinges. My immediate sensations are incapable of analysis. To be confronted in a place as thoroughly deserted as I had deemed the old castle with evidence of the presence of man or spirit, produced in my brain a horror of the most acute description. When at last I turned and faced the seat of the sound, my eyes must have started from their orbits at the sight that they beheld. There in the ancient Gothic doorway stood a human figure. It was that of a man clad in a skull-cap and long mediaeval tunic of dark colour. His long hair and flowing beard were of a terrible and intense black hue, and of incredible profusion. His forehead, high beyond the usual dimensions; his cheeks, deep-sunken and heavily lined with wrinkles; and his hands, long, claw-like, and gnarled, were of such a deathly, marble-like whiteness as I have never elsewhere seen in man. His figure, lean to the proportions of a skeleton, was strangely bent and almost lost within the voluminous folds of his peculiar garment. But strangest of all were his eyes; twin caves of abysmal blackness, profound in expression of understanding, yet inhuman in degree of wickedness. These were now fixed upon me, piercing my soul with their hatred, and rooting me to the spot whereon I stood. At last the figure spoke in a rumbling voice that chilled me through with its dull hollowness and latent malevolence. The language in which the discourse was clothed was that debased form of Latin in use amongst the more learned men of the Middle Ages, and made familiar to me by my prolonged researches into the works of the old alchemists and daemonologists. The apparition spoke of the curse which had hovered over my house, told me of my coming end, dwelt on the wrong perpetrated by my ancestor against old Michel Mauvais, and gloated over the revenge of Charles Le Sorcier. He told how the young Charles had escaped into the night, returning in after years to kill Godfrey the heir with an arrow just as he approached the age which had been his father's at his assassination; how he had secretly returned to the estate and established himself, unknown, in the even then deserted subterranean chamber whose doorway now framed the hideous narrator; how he had seized Robert, son of Godfrey, in a field, forced poison down his throat, and left him to die at the age of thirty-two, thus maintaining the foul provisions of his vengeful curse. At this point I was left to imagine the solution of the greatest mystery of all, how the curse had been fulfilled since that time when Charles Le Sorcier must in the course of Nature have died, for the man digressed into an account of the deep alchemical studies of the two wizards, father and son, speaking most particularly of the researches of Charles Le Sorcier concerning the elixir which should grant to him who partook of it eternal life and youth.
     His enthusiasm had seemed for the moment to remove from his terrible eyes the hatred that had at first so haunted them, but suddenly the fiendish glare returned, and with a shocking sound like the hissing of a serpent, the stranger raised a glass phial with the evident intent of ending my life as had Charles Le Sorcier, six hundred years before, ended that of my ancestor. Prompted by some preserving instinct of self-defence, I broke through the spell that had hitherto held me immovable, and flung my now dying torch at the creature who menaced my existence. I heard the phial break harmlessly against the stones of the passage as the tunic of the strange man caught fire and lit the horrid scene with a ghastly radiance. The shriek of fright and impotent malice emitted by the would-be assassin proved too much for my already shaken nerves, and I fell prone upon the slimy floor in a total faint.
     When at last my senses returned, all was frightfully dark, and my mind remembering what had occurred, shrank from the idea of beholding more; yet curiosity overmastered all. Who, I asked myself, was this man of evil, and how came he within the castle walls? Why should he seek to avenge the death of poor Michel Mauvais, and how had the curse been carried on through all the long centuries since the time of Charles Le Sorcier? The dread of years was lifted from my shoulders, for I knew that he whom I had felled was the source of all my danger from the curse; and now that I was free, I burned with the desire to learn more of the sinister thing which had haunted my line for centuries, and made of my own youth one long-continued nightmare. Determined upon further exploration, I felt in my pockets for flint and steel, and lit the unused torch which I had with me. First of all, the new light revealed the distorted and blackened form of the mysterious stranger. The hideous eyes were now closed. Disliking the sight, I turned away and entered the chamber beyond the Gothic door. Here I found what seemed much like an alchemist's laboratory. In one corner was an immense pile of a shining yellow metal that sparkled gorgeously in the light of the torch. It may have been gold, but I did not pause to examine it, for I was strangely affected by that which I had undergone. At the farther end of the apartment was an opening leading out into one of the many wild ravines of the dark hillside forest. Filled with wonder, yet now realising how the man had obtained access to the chateau, I proceeded to return. I had intended to pass by the remains of the stranger with averted face, but as I approached the body, I seemed to hear emanating from it a faint sound, as though life were not yet wholly extinct. Aghast, I turned to examine the charred and shrivelled figure on the floor. Then all at once the horrible eyes, blacker even than the seared face in which they were set, opened wide with an expression which I was unable to interpret. The cracked lips tried to frame words which I could not well understand. Once I caught the name of Charles Le Sorcier, and again I fancied that the words years and curse issued from the twisted mouth. Still I was at a loss to gather the purport of his disconnected speech. At my evident ignorance of his meaning, the pitchy eyes once more flashed malevolently at me, until, helpless as I saw my opponent to be, I trembled as I watched him.
     Suddenly the wretch, animated with his last burst of strength, raised his hideous head from the damp and sunken pavement. Then, as I remained, paralysed with fear, he found his voice and in his dying breath screamed forth those words which have ever afterward haunted my days and my nights. Fool, he shrieked, can you not guess my secret? Have you no brain whereby you may recognise the will which has through six long centuries fulfilled the dreadful curse upon your house? Have I not told you of the great elixir of eternal life? Know you not how the secret of Alchemy was solved? I tell you, it is I! I! I! that have lived for six hundred years to maintain my revenge, FOR I AM CHARLES LE SORCIER!
     

        of the eyes. Any of the documented indications of Hermaeus Mora's
        permanent influence. Hmm, no, you look fine. Well, at least no
        different than when I first saw you.

        Don't you want to know what happened with Miraak?
        
         Who? Oh him. Well, I assume you killed him. Or Hermaeus Mora turned on
         him when you looked like the winning bet. Or a bit of both.

        You don't need to worry about me.
        
         I wasn't worried. Just interested. I don't get to observe first-hand
         many people who've spoken to Hermaeus Mora.
         
I am forced into speech because men of science have refused to follow my advice without knowing why. It is altogether against my will that I tell my reasons for opposing this contemplated invasion of the antarctic—with its vast fossil-hunt and its wholesale boring and melting of the ancient ice-cap—and I am the more reluctant because my warning may be in vain. Doubt of the real facts, as I must reveal them, is inevitable; yet if I suppressed what will seem extravagant and incredible there would be nothing left. The hitherto withheld photographs, both ordinary and aërial, will count in my favour; for they are damnably vivid and graphic. Still, they will be doubted because of the great lengths to which clever fakery can be carried. The ink drawings, of course, will be jeered at as obvious impostures; notwithstanding a strangeness of technique which art experts ought to remark and puzzle over.
     In the end I must rely on the judgment and standing of the few scientific leaders who have, on the one hand, sufficient independence of thought to weigh my data on its own hideously convincing merits or in the light of certain primordial and highly baffling myth-cycles; and on the other hand, sufficient influence to deter the exploring world in general from any rash and overambitious programme in the region of those mountains of madness. It is an unfortunate fact that relatively obscure men like myself and my associates, connected only with a small university, have little chance of making an impression where matters of a wildly bizarre or highly controversial nature are concerned.
     It is further against us that we are not, in the strictest sense, specialists in the fields which came primarily to be concerned. As a geologist my object in leading the Miskatonic University Expedition was wholly that of securing deep-level specimens of rock and soil from various parts of the antarctic continent, aided by the remarkable drill devised by Prof. Frank H. Pabodie of our engineering department. I had no wish to be a pioneer in any other field than this; but I did hope that the use of this new mechanical appliance at different points along previously explored paths would bring to light materials of a sort hitherto unreached by the ordinary methods of collection. Pabodie's drilling apparatus, as the public already knows from our reports, was unique and radical in its lightness, portability, and capacity to combine the ordinary artesian drill principle with the principle of the small circular rock drill in such a way as to cope quickly with strata of varying hardness. Steel head, jointed rods, gasoline motor, collapsible wooden derrick, dynamiting paraphernalia, cording, rubbish-removal auger, and sectional piping for bores five inches wide and up to 1000 feet deep all formed, with needed accessories, no greater load than three seven-dog sledges could carry; this being made possible by the clever aluminum alloy of which most of the metal objects were fashioned. Four large Dornier aëroplanes, designed especially for the tremendous altitude flying necessary on the antarctic plateau and with added fuel-warming and quick-starting devices worked out by Pabodie, could transport our entire expedition from a base at the edge of the great ice barrier to various suitable inland points, and from these points a sufficient quota of dogs would serve us.
     We planned to cover as great an area as one antarctic season—or longer, if absolutely necessary—would permit, operating mostly in the mountain-ranges and on the plateau south of Ross Sea; regions explored in varying degree by Shackleton, Amundsen, Scott, and Byrd. With frequent changes of camp, made by aëroplane and involving distances great enough to be of geological significance, we expected to unearth a quite unprecedented amount of material; especially in the pre-Cambrian strata of which so narrow a range of antarctic specimens had previously been secured. We wished also to obtain as great as possible a variety of the upper fossiliferous rocks, since the primal life-history of this bleak realm of ice and death is of the highest importance to our knowledge of the earth's past. That the antarctic continent was once temperate and even tropical, with a teeming vegetable and animal life of which the lichens, marine fauna, arachnida, and penguins of the northern edge are the only survivals, is a matter of common information; and we hoped to expand that information in variety, accuracy, and detail. When a simple boring revealed fossiliferous signs, we would enlarge the aperture by blasting in order to get specimens of suitable size and condition.
     Our borings, of varying depth according to the promise held out by the upper soil or rock, were to be confined to exposed or nearly exposed land surfaces—these inevitably being slopes and ridges because of the mile or two-mile thickness of solid ice overlying the lower levels. We could not afford to waste drilling depth on any considerable amount of mere glaciation, though Pabodie had worked out a plan for sinking copper electrodes in thick clusters of borings and melting off limited areas of ice with current from a gasoline-driven dynamo. It is this plan—which we could not put into effect except experimentally on an expedition such as ours—that the coming Starkweather-Moore Expedition proposes to follow despite the warnings I have issued since our return from the antarctic.
     The public knows of the Miskatonic Expedition through our frequent wireless reports to the Arkham Advertiser and Associated Press, and through the later articles of Pabodie and myself. We consisted of four men from the University—Pabodie, Lake of the biology department, Atwood of the physics department (also a meteorologist), and I representing geology and having nominal command—besides sixteen assistants; seven graduate students from Miskatonic and nine skilled mechanics. Of these sixteen, twelve were qualified aëroplane pilots, all but two of whom were competent wireless operators. Eight of them understood navigation with compass and sextant, as did Pabodie, Atwood, and I. In addition, of course, our two ships—wooden ex-whalers, reinforced for ice conditions and having auxiliary steam—were fully manned. The Nathaniel Derby Pickman Foundation, aided by a few special contributions, financed the expedition; hence our preparations were extremely thorough despite the absence of great publicity. The dogs, sledges, machines, camp materials, and unassembled parts of our five planes were delivered in Boston, and there our ships were loaded. We were marvellously well-equipped for our specific purposes, and in all matters pertaining to supplies, regimen, transportation, and camp construction we profited by the excellent example of our many recent and exceptionally brilliant predecessors. It was the unusual number and fame of these predecessors which made our own expedition—ample though it was—so little noticed by the world at large.
     As the newspapers told, we sailed from Boston Harbour on September 2, 1930; taking a leisurely course down the coast and through the Panama Canal, and stopping at Samoa and Hobart, Tasmania, at which latter place we took on final supplies. None of our exploring party had ever been in the polar regions before, hence we all relied greatly on our ship captains—J. B. Douglas, commanding the brig Arkham, and serving as commander of the sea party, and Georg Thorfinnssen, commanding the barque Miskatonic—both veteran whalers in antarctic waters. As we left the inhabited world behind the sun sank lower and lower in the north, and stayed longer and longer above the horizon each day. At about 62° South Latitude we sighted our first icebergs—table-like objects with vertical sides—and just before reaching the Antarctic Circle, which we crossed on October 20 with appropriately quaint ceremonies, we were considerably troubled with field ice. The falling temperature bothered me considerably after our long voyage through the tropics, but I tried to brace up for the worse rigours to come. On many occasions the curious atmospheric effects enchanted me vastly; these including a strikingly vivid mirage—the first I had ever seen—in which distant bergs became the battlements of unimaginable cosmic castles.
     Pushing through the ice, which was fortunately neither extensive nor thickly packed, we regained open water at South Latitude 67°, East Longitude 175°. On the morning of October 26 a strong land blink appeared on the south, and before noon we all felt a thrill of excitement at beholding a vast, lofty, and snow-clad mountain chain which opened out and covered the whole vista ahead. At last we had encountered an outpost of the great unknown continent and its cryptic world of frozen death. These peaks were obviously the Admiralty Range discovered by Ross, and it would now be our task to round Cape Adare and sail down the east coast of Victoria Land to our contemplated base on the shore of McMurdo Sound at the foot of the volcano Erebus in South Latitude 77° 9′.
     The last lap of the voyage was vivid and fancy-stirring, great barren peaks of mystery looming up constantly against the west as the low northern sun of noon or the still lower horizon-grazing southern sun of midnight poured its hazy reddish rays over the white snow, bluish ice and water lanes, and black bits of exposed granite slope. Through the desolate summits swept raging intermittent gusts of the terrible antarctic wind; whose cadences sometimes held vague suggestions of a wild and half-sentient musical piping, with notes extending over a wide range, and which for some subconscious mnemonic reason seemed to me disquieting and even dimly terrible. Something about the scene reminded me of the strange and disturbing Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich, and of the still stranger and more disturbing descriptions of the evilly fabled plateau of Leng which occur in the dreaded Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred. I was rather sorry, later on, that I had ever looked into that monstrous book at the college library.
     On the seventh of November, sight of the westward range having been temporarily lost, we passed Franklin Island; and the next day descried the cones of Mts. Erebus and Terror on Ross Island ahead, with the long line of the Parry Mountains beyond. There now stretched off to the east the low, white line of the great ice barrier; rising perpendicularly to a height of 200 feet like the rocky cliffs of Quebec, and marking the end of southward navigation. In the afternoon we entered McMurdo Sound and stood off the coast in the lee of smoking Mt. Erebus. The scoriac peak towered up some 12,700 feet against the eastern sky, like a Japanese print of the sacred Fujiyama; while beyond it rose the white, ghost-like height of Mt. Terror, 10,900 feet in altitude, and now extinct as a volcano. Puffs of smoke from Erebus came intermittently, and one of the graduate assistants—a brilliant young fellow named Danforth—pointed out what looked like lava on the snowy slope; remarking that this mountain, discovered in 1840, had undoubtedly been the source of Poe's image when he wrote seven years later of

      —the lavas that restlessly roll
Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek
     In the ultimate climes of the pole—
That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek
     In the realms of the boreal pole.

Danforth was a great reader of bizarre material, and had talked a good deal of Poe. I was interested myself because of the antarctic scene of Poe's only long story—the disturbing and enigmatical Arthur Gordon Pym. On the barren shore, and on the lofty ice barrier in the background, myriads of grotesque penguins squawked and flapped their fins; while many fat seals were visible on the water, swimming or sprawling across large cakes of slowly drifting ice.
     Using small boats, we effected a difficult landing on Ross Island shortly after midnight on the morning of the 9th, carrying a line of cable from each of the ships and preparing to unload supplies by means of a breeches-buoy arrangement. Our sensations on first treading antarctic soil were poignant and complex, even though at this particular point the Scott and Shackleton expeditions had preceded us. Our camp on the frozen shore below the volcano's slope was only a provisional one; headquarters being kept aboard the Arkham. We landed all our drilling apparatus, dogs, sledges, tents, provisions, gasoline tanks, experimental ice-melting outfit, cameras both ordinary and aërial, aëroplane parts, and other accessories, including three small portable wireless outfits (besides those in the planes) capable of communicating with the Arkham's large outfit from any part of the antarctic continent that we would be likely to visit. The ship's outfit, communicating with the outside world, was to convey press reports to the Arkham Advertiser's powerful wireless station on Kingsport Head, Mass. We hoped to complete our work during a single antarctic summer; but if this proved impossible we would winter on the Arkham, sending the Miskatonic north before the freezing of the ice for another summer's supplies.
     I need not repeat what the newspapers have already published about our early work of our ascent of Mt. Erebus; our successful mineral borings at several points on Ross Island and the singular speed with which Pabodie's apparatus accomplished them, even through solid rock layers; our provisional test of the small ice-melting equipment; our perilous ascent of the great barrier with sledges and supplies; and our final assembling of five huge aëroplanes at the camp atop the barrier. The health of our land party—twenty men and 55 Alaskan sledge dogs—was remarkable, though of course we had so far encountered no really destructive temperatures or windstorms. For the most part, the thermometer varied between zero and 20° or 25° above, and our experience with New England winters had accustomed us to rigours of this sort. The barrier camp was semi-permanent, and destined to be a storage cache for gasoline, provisions, dynamite, and other supplies. Only four of our planes were needed to carry the actual exploring material, the fifth being left with a pilot and two men from the ships at the storage cache to form a means of reaching us from the Arkham in case all our exploring planes were lost. Later, when not using all the other planes for moving apparatus, we would employ one or two in a shuttle transportation service between this cache and another permanent base on the great plateau from 600 to 700 miles southward, beyond Beardmore Glacier. Despite the almost unanimous accounts of appalling winds and tempests that pour down from the plateau, we determined to dispense with intermediate bases; taking our chances in the interest of economy and probable efficiency.
     Wireless reports have spoken of the breath-taking four-hour non-stop flight of our squadron on November 21 over the lofty shelf ice, with vast peaks rising on the west, and the unfathomed silences echoing to the sound of our engines. Wind troubled us only moderately, and our radio compasses helped us through the one opaque fog we encountered. When the vast rise loomed ahead, between Latitudes 83° and 84°, we knew we had reached Beardmore Glacier, the largest valley glacier in the world, and that the frozen sea was now giving place to a frowning and mountainous coastline. At last we were truly entering the white, aeon-dead world of the ultimate south, and even as we realised it we saw the peak of Mt. Nansen in the eastern distance, towering up to its height of almost 15,000 feet.
     The successful establishment of the southern base above the glacier in Latitude 86° 7′, East Longitude 174° 23′, and the phenomenally rapid and effective borings and blastings made at various points reached by our sledge trips and short aëroplane flights, are matters of history; as is the arduous and triumphant ascent of Mt. Nansen by Pabodie and two of the graduate students—Gedney and Carroll—on December 13–15. We were some 8500 feet above sea-level, and when experimental drillings revealed solid ground only twelve feet down through the snow and ice at certain points, we made considerable use of the small melting apparatus and sunk bores and performed dynamiting at many places where no previous explorer had ever thought of securing mineral specimens. The pre-Cambrian granites and beacon sandstones thus obtained confirmed our belief that this plateau was homogeneous with the great bulk of the continent to the west, but somewhat different from the parts lying eastward below South America—which we then thought to form a separate and smaller continent divided from the larger one by a frozen junction of Ross and Weddell Seas, though Byrd has since disproved the hypothesis.
     In certain of the sandstones, dynamited and chiselled after boring revealed their nature, we found some highly interesting fossil markings and fragments—notably ferns, seaweeds, trilobites, crinoids, and such molluscs as lingulae and gasteropods—all of which seemed of real significance in connexion with the region's primordial history. There was also a queer triangular, striated marking about a foot in greatest diameter which Lake pieced together from three fragments of slate brought up from a deep-blasted aperture. These fragments came from a point to the westward, near the Queen Alexandra Range; and Lake, as a biologist, seemed to find their curious marking unusually puzzling and provocative, though to my geological eye it looked not unlike some of the ripple effects reasonably common in the sedimentary rocks. Since slate is no more than a metamorphic formation into which a sedimentary stratum is pressed, and since the pressure itself produces odd distorting effects on any markings which may exist, I saw no reason for extreme wonder over the striated depression.
     On January 6, 1931, Lake, Pabodie, Danforth, all six of the students, four mechanics, and I flew directly over the south pole in two of the great planes, being forced down once by a sudden high wind which fortunately did not develop into a typical storm. This was, as the papers have stated, one of several observation flights; during others of which we tried to discern new topographical features in areas unreached by previous explorers. Our early flights were disappointing in this latter respect; though they afforded us some magnificent examples of the richly fantastic and deceptive mirages of the polar regions, of which our sea voyage had given us some brief foretastes. Distant mountains floated in the sky as enchanted cities, and often the whole white world would dissolve into a gold, silver, and scarlet land of Dunsanian dreams and adventurous expectancy under the magic of the low midnight sun. On cloudy days we had considerable trouble in flying, owing to the tendency of snowy earth and sky to merge into one mystical opalescent void with no visible horizon to mark the junction of the two.
     At length we resolved to carry out our original plan of flying 500 miles eastward with all four exploring planes and establishing a fresh sub-base at a point which would probably be on the smaller continental division, as we mistakenly conceived it. Geological specimens obtained there would be desirable for purposes of comparison. Our health so far had remained excellent; lime-juice well offsetting the steady diet of tinned and salted food, and temperatures generally above zero enabling us to do without our thickest furs. It was now midsummer, and with haste and care we might be able to conclude work by March and avoid a tedious wintering through the long antarctic night. Several savage windstorms had burst upon us from the west, but we had escaped damage through the skill of Atwood in devising rudimentary aëroplane shelters and windbreaks of heavy snow blocks, and reinforcing the principal camp buildings with snow. Our good luck and efficiency had indeed been almost uncanny.
     The outside world knew, of course, of our programme, and was told also of Lake's strange and dogged insistence on a westward—or rather, northwestward—prospecting trip before our radical shift to the new base. It seems he had pondered a great deal, and with alarmingly radical daring, over that triangular striated marking in the slate; reading into it certain contradictions in Nature and geological period which whetted his curiosity to the utmost, and made him avid to sink more borings and blastings in the west-stretching formation to which the exhumed fragments evidently belonged. He was strangely convinced that the marking was the print of some bulky, unknown, and radically unclassifiable organism of considerably advanced evolution, notwithstanding that the rock which bore it was of so vastly ancient a date—Cambrian if not actually pre-Cambrian—as to preclude the probable existence not only of all highly evolved life, but of any life at all above the unicellular or at most the trilobite stage. These fragments, with their odd marking, must have been 500 million to a thousand million years old.

II.

Popular imagination, I judge, responded actively to our wireless bulletins of Lake's start northwestward into regions never trodden by human foot or penetrated by human imagination; though we did not mention his wild hopes of revolutionising the entire sciences of biology and geology. His preliminary sledging and boring journey of January 11–18 with Pabodie and five others—marred by the loss of two dogs in an upset when crossing one of the great pressure-ridges in the ice—had brought up more and more of the Archaean slate; and even I was interested by the singular profusion of evident fossil markings in that unbelievably ancient stratum. These markings, however, were of very primitive life-forms involving no great paradox except that any life-forms should occur in rock as definitely pre-Cambrian as this seemed to be; hence I still failed to see the good sense of Lake's demand for an interlude in our time-saving programme—an interlude requiring the use of all four planes, many men, and the whole of the expedition's mechanical apparatus. I did not, in the end, veto the plan; though I decided not to accompany the northwestward party despite Lake's plea for my geological advice. While they were gone, I would remain at the base with Pabodie and five men and work out final plans for the eastward shift. In preparation for this transfer one of the planes had begun to move up a good gasoline supply from McMurdo Sound; but this could wait temporarily. I kept with me one sledge and nine dogs, since it is unwise to be at any time without possible transportation in an utterly tenantless world of aeon-long death.
     Lake's sub-expedition into the unknown, as everyone will recall, sent out its own reports from the short-wave transmitters on the planes; these being simultaneously picked up by our apparatus at the southern base and by the Arkham at McMurdo Sound, whence they were relayed to the outside world on wave-lengths up to fifty metres. The start was made January 22 at 4 A.M.; and the first wireless message we received came only two hours later, when Lake spoke of descending and starting a small-scale ice-melting and bore at a point some 300 miles away from us. Six hours after that a second and very excited message told of the frantic, beaver-like work whereby a shallow shaft had been sunk and blasted; culminating in the discovery of slate fragments with several markings approximately like the one which had caused the original puzzlement.
     Three hours later a brief bulletin announced the resumption of the flight in the teeth of a raw and piercing gale; and when I despatched a message of protest against further hazards, Lake replied curtly that his new specimens made any hazard worth taking. I saw that his excitement had reached the point of mutiny, and that I could do nothing to check this headlong risk of the whole expedition's success; but it was appalling to think of his plunging deeper and deeper into that treacherous and sinister white immensity of tempests and unfathomed mysteries which stretched off for some 1500 miles to the half-known, half-suspected coast-line of Queen Mary and Knox Lands.
     Then, in about an hour and a half more, came that doubly excited message from Lake's moving plane which almost reversed my sentiments and made me wish I had accompanied the party.
     1005 P.M. On the wing. After snowstorm, have spied mountain-range ahead higher than any hitherto seen. May equal Himalayas allowing for height of plateau. Probable Latitude 76° 15′, Longitude 113° 10′ E. Reaches far as can see to right and left. Suspicion of two smoking cones. All peaks black and bare of snow. Gale blowing off them impedes navigation.
     After that Pabodie, the men, and I hung breathlessly over the receiver. Thought of this titanic mountain rampart 700 miles away inflamed our deepest sense of adventure; and we rejoiced that our expedition, if not ourselves personally, had been its discoverers. In half an hour Lake called us again.
     Moulton's plane forced down on plateau in foothills, but nobody hurt and perhaps can repair. Shall transfer essentials to other three for return or further moves if necessary, but no more heavy plane travel needed just now. Mountains surpass anything in imagination. Am going up scouting in Carroll's plane, with all weight out. You can't imagine anything like this. Highest peaks must go over 35,000 feet. Everest out of the running. Atwood to work out height with theodolite while Carroll and I go up. Probably wrong about cones, for formations look stratified. Possibly pre-Cambrian slate with other strata mixed in. Queer skyline effects—regular sections of cubes clinging to highest peaks. Whole thing marvellous in red-gold light of low sun. Like land of mystery in a dream or gateway to forbidden world of untrodden wonder. Wish you were here to study.
     Though it was technically sleeping-time, not one of us listeners thought for a moment of retiring. It must have been a good deal the same at McMurdo Sound, where the supply cache and the Arkham were also getting the messages; for Capt. Douglas gave out a call congratulating everybody on the important find, and Sherman, the cache operator, seconded his sentiments. We were sorry, of course, about the damaged aëroplane; but hoped it could be easily mended. Then, at 11 P.M., came another call from Lake.
     Up with Carroll over highest foothills. Don't dare try really tall peaks in present weather, but shall later. Frightful work climbing, and hard going at this altitude, but worth it. Great range fairly solid, hence can't get any glimpses beyond. Main summits exceed Himalayas, and very queer. Range looks like pre-Cambrian slate, with plain signs of many other upheaved strata. Was wrong about volcanism. Goes farther in either direction than we can see. Swept clear of snow above about 21,000 feet. Odd formations on slopes of highest mountains. Great low square blocks with exactly vertical sides, and rectangular lines of low vertical ramparts, like the old Asian castles clinging to steep mountains in Roerich's paintings. Impressive from distance. Flew close to some, and Carroll thought they were formed of smaller separate pieces, but that is probably weathering. Most edges crumbled and rounded off as if exposed to storms and climate changes for millions of years. Parts, especially upper parts, seem to be of lighter-coloured rock than any visible strata on slopes proper, hence an evidently crystalline origin. Close flying shews many cave-mouths, some unusually regular in outline, square or semicircular. You must come and investigate. Think I saw rampart squarely on top of one peak. Height seems about 30,000 to 35,000 feet. Am up 21,500 myself, in devilish gnawing cold. Wind whistles and pipes through passes and in and out of caves, but no flying danger so far.
     From then on for another half-hour Lake kept up a running fire of comment, and expressed his intention of climbing some of the peaks on foot. I replied that I would join him as soon as he could send a plane, and that Pabodie and I would work out the best gasoline plan—just where and how to concentrate our supply in view of the expedition's altered character. Obviously, Lake's boring operations, as well as his aëroplane activities, would need a great deal delivered for the new base which he was to establish at the foot of the mountains; and it was possible that the eastward flight might not be made after all this season. In connexion with this business I called Capt. Douglas and asked him to get as much as possible out of the ships and up the barrier with the single dog-team we had left there. A direct route across the unknown region between Lake and McMurdo Sound was what we really ought to establish.
     Lake called me later to say that he had decided to let the camp stay where Moulton's plane had been forced down, and where repairs had already progressed somewhat. The ice-sheet was very thin, with dark ground here and there visible, and he would sink some borings and blasts at that very point before making any sledge trips or climbing expeditions. He spoke of the ineffable majesty of the whole scene, and the queer state of his sensations at being in the lee of vast silent pinnacles whose ranks shot up like a wall reaching the sky at the world's rim. Atwood's theodolite observations had placed the height of the five tallest peaks at from 30,000 to 34,000 feet. The windswept nature of the terrain clearly disturbed Lake, for it argued the occasional existence of prodigious gales violent beyond anything we had so far encountered. His camp lay a little more than five miles from where the higher foothills abruptly rose. I could almost trace a note of subconscious alarm in his words—flashed across a glacial void of 700 miles—as he urged that we all hasten with the matter and get the strange new region disposed of as soon as possible. He was about to rest now, after a continuous day's work of almost unparalleled speed, strenuousness, and results.
     In the morning I had a three-cornered wireless talk with Lake and Capt. Douglas at their widely separated bases; and it was agreed that one of Lake's planes would come to my base for Pabodie, the five men, and myself, as well as for all the fuel it could carry. The rest of the fuel question, depending on our decision about an easterly trip, could wait for a few days; since Lake had enough for immediate camp heat and borings. Eventually the old southern base ought to be restocked; but if we postponed the easterly trip we would not use it till the next summer, and meanwhile Lake must send a plane to explore a direct route between his new mountains and McMurdo Sound.
     Pabodie and I prepared to close our base for a short or long period, as the case might be. If we wintered in the antarctic we would probably fly straight from Lake's base to the Arkham without returning to this spot. Some of our conical tents had already been reinforced by blocks of hard snow, and now we decided to complete the job of making a permanent Esquimau village. Owing to a very liberal tent supply, Lake had with him all that his base would need even after our arrival. I wirelessed that Pabodie and I would be ready for the northwestward move after one day's work and one night's rest.
     Our labours, however, were not very steady after 4 P.M.; for about that time Lake began sending in the most extraordinary and excited messages. His working day had started unpropitiously; since an aëroplane survey of the nearly exposed rock surfaces shewed an entire absence of those Archaean and primordial strata for which he was looking, and which formed so great a part of the colossal peaks that loomed up at a tantalising distance from the camp. Most of the rocks glimpsed were apparently Jurassic and Comanchian sandstones and Permian and Triassic schists, with now and then a glossy black outcropping suggesting a hard and slaty coal. This rather discouraged Lake, whose plans all hinged on unearthing specimens more than 500 million years older. It was clear to him that in order to recover the Archaean slate vein in which he had found the odd markings, he would have to make a long sledge trip from these foothills to the steep slopes of the gigantic mountains themselves.
     He had resolved, nevertheless, to do some local boring as part of the expedition's general programme; hence set up the drill and put five men to work with it while the rest finished settling the camp and repairing the damaged aëroplane. The softest visible rock—a sandstone about a quarter of a mile from the camp—had been chosen for the first sampling; and the drill made excellent progress without much supplementary blasting. It was about three hours afterward, following the first really heavy blast of the operation, that the shouting of the drill crew was heard; and that young Gedney—the acting foreman—rushed into the camp with the startling news.
     They had struck a cave. Early in the boring the sandstone had given place to a vein of Comanchian limestone full of minute fossil cephalopods, corals, echini, and spirifera, and with occasional suggestions of siliceous sponges and marine vertebrate bones—the latter probably of teliosts, sharks, and ganoids. This in itself was important enough, as affording the first vertebrate fossils the expedition had yet secured; but when shortly afterward the drill-head dropped through the stratum into apparent vacancy, a wholly new and doubly intense wave of excitement spread among the excavators. A good-sized blast had laid open the subterrene secret; and now, through a jagged aperture perhaps five feet across and three feet thick, there yawned before the avid searchers a section of shallow limestone hollowing worn more than fifty million years ago by the trickling ground waters of a bygone tropic world.
     The hollowed layer was not more than seven or eight feet deep, but extended off indefinitely in all directions and had a fresh, slightly moving air which suggested its membership in an extensive subterranean system. Its roof and floor were abundantly equipped with large stalactites and stalagmites, some of which met in columnar form; but important above all else was the vast deposit of shells and bones which in places nearly choked the passage. Washed down from unknown jungles of Mesozoic tree-ferns and fungi, and forests of Tertiary cycads, fan-palms, and primitive angiosperms, this osseous medley contained representatives of more Cretaceous, Eocene, and other animal species than the greatest palaeontologist could have counted or classified in a year. Molluscs, crustacean armour, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and early mammals—great and small, known and unknown. No wonder Gedney ran back to the camp shouting, and no wonder everyone else dropped work and rushed headlong through the biting cold to where the tall derrick marked a new-found gateway to secrets of inner earth and vanished aeons.
     When Lake had satisfied the first keen edge of his curiosity he scribbled a message in his notebook and had young Moulton run back to the camp to despatch it by wireless. This was my first word of the discovery, and it told of the identification of early shells, bones of ganoids and placoderms, remnants of labyrinthodonts and thecodonts, great mososaur skull fragments, dinosaur vertebrae and armour-plates, pterodactyl teeth and wing-bones, archaeopteryx debris, Miocene sharks' teeth, primitive bird-skulls, and skulls, vertebrae, and other bones of archaic mammals such as palaeotheres, xiphodons, dinocerases, eohippi, oreodons, and titanotheres. There was nothing as recent as a mastodon, elephant, true camel, deer, or bovine animal; hence Lake concluded that the last deposits had occurred during the Oligocene age, and that the hollowed stratum had lain in its present dried, dead, and inaccessible state for at least thirty million years.
     On the other hand, the prevalence of very early life-forms was singular in the highest degree. Though the limestone formation was, on the evidence of such typical imbedded fossils as ventriculites, positively and unmistakably Comanchian and not a particle earlier; the free fragments in the hollow space included a surprising proportion from organisms hitherto considered as peculiar to far older periods—even rudimentary fishes, molluscs, and corals as remote as the Silurian or Ordovician. The inevitable inference was that in this part of the world there had been a remarkable and unique degree of continuity between the life of over 300 million years ago and that of only thirty million years ago. How far this continuity had extended beyond the Oligocene age when the cavern was closed, was of course past all speculation. In any event, the coming of the frightful ice in the Pleistocene some 500,000 years ago—a mere yesterday as compared with the age of this cavity—must have put an end to any of the primal forms which had locally managed to outlive their common terms.
     Lake was not content to let his first message stand, but had another bulletin written and despatched across the snow to the camp before Moulton could get back. After that Moulton stayed at the wireless in one of the planes; transmitting to me—and to the Arkham for relaying to the outside world—the frequent postscripts which Lake sent him by a succession of messengers. Those who followed the newspapers will remember the excitement created among men of science by that afternoon's reports—reports which have finally led, after all these years, to the organisation of that very Starkweather-Moore Expedition which I am so anxious to dissuade from its purposes. I had better give the messages literally as Lake sent them, and as our base operator McTighe translated them from his pencil shorthand.
     Fowler makes discovery of highest importance in sandstone and limestone fragments from blasts. Several distinct triangular striated prints like those in Archaean slate, proving that source survived from over 600 million years ago to Comanchian times without more than moderate morphological changes and decrease in average size. Comanchian prints apparently more primitive or decadent, if anything, than older ones. Emphasise importance of discovery in press. Will mean to biology what Einstein has meant to mathematics and physics. Joins up with my previous work and amplifies conclusions. Appears to indicate, as I suspected, that earth has seen whole cycle or cycles of organic life before known one that begins with Archaeozoic cells. Was evolved and specialised not later than thousand million years ago, when planet was young and recently uninhabitable for any life-forms or normal protoplasmic structure. Question arises when, where, and how development took place.
————————
     Later. Examining certain skeletal fragments of large land and marine saurians and primitive mammals, find singular local wounds or injuries to bony structure not attributable to any known predatory or carnivorous animal of any period. Of two sorts—straight, penetrant bores, and apparently hacking incisions. One or two cases of cleanly severed bone. Not many specimens affected. Am sending to camp for electric torches. Will extend search area underground by hacking away stalactites.
————————
     Still later. Have found peculiar soapstone fragment about six inches across and an inch and a half thick, wholly unlike any visible local formation. Greenish, but no evidences to place its period. Has curious smoothness and regularity. Shaped like five-pointed star with tips broken off, and signs of other cleavage at inward angles and in centre of surface. Small, smooth depression in centre of unbroken surface. Arouses much curiosity as to source and weathering. Probably some freak of water action. Carroll, with magnifier, thinks he can make out additional markings of geologic significance. Groups of tiny dots in regular patterns. Dogs growing uneasy as we work, and seem to hate this soapstone. Must see if it has any peculiar odour. Will report again when Mills gets back with light and we start on underground area.
————————
     1015 P.M. Important discovery. Orrendorf and Watkins, working underground at 945 with light, found monstrous barrel-shaped fossil of wholly unknown nature; probably vegetable unless overgrown specimen of unknown marine radiata. Tissue evidently preserved by mineral salts. Tough as leather, but astonishing flexibility retained in places. Marks of broken-off parts at ends and around sides. Six feet end to end, 3.5 feet central diameter, tapering to 1 foot at each end. Like a barrel with five bulging ridges in place of staves. Lateral breakages, as of thinnish stalks, are at equator in middle of these ridges. In furrows between ridges are curious growths. Combs or wings that fold up and spread out like fans. All greatly damaged but one, which gives almost seven-foot wing spread. Arrangement reminds one of certain monsters of primal myth, especially fabled Elder Things in Necronomicon. These wings seem to be membraneous, stretched on framework of glandular tubing. Apparent minute orifices in frame tubing at wing tips. Ends of body shrivelled, giving no clue to interior or to what has been broken off there. Must dissect when we get back to camp. Can't decide whether vegetable or animal. Many features obviously of almost incredible primitiveness. Have set all hands cutting stalactites and looking for further specimens. Additional scarred bones found, but these must wait. Having trouble with dogs. They can't endure the new specimen, and would probably tear it to pieces if we didn't keep it at a distance from them.
————————
     1130 P.M. Attention, Dyer, Pabodie, Douglas. Matter of highest—I might say transcendent—importance. Arkham must relay to Kingsport Head Station at once. Strange barrel growth is the Archaean thing that left prints in rocks. Mills, Boudreau, and Fowler discover cluster of thirteen more at underground point forty feet from aperture. Mixed with curiously rounded and configured soapstone fragments smaller than one previously found—star-shaped but no marks of breakage except at some of the points. Of organic specimens, eight apparently perfect, with all appendages. Have brought all to surface, leading off dogs to distance. They cannot stand the things. Give close attention to description and repeat back for accuracy. Papers must get this right.
     Objects are eight feet long all over. Six-foot five-ridged barrel torso 3.5 feet central diameter, 1 foot end diameters. Dark grey, flexible, and infinitely tough. Seven-foot membraneous wings of same colour, found folded, spread out of furrows between ridges. Wing framework tubular or glandular, of lighter grey, with orifices at wing tips. Spread wings have serrated edge. Around equator, one at central apex of each of the five vertical, stave-like ridges, are five systems of light grey flexible arms or tentacles found tightly folded to torso but expansible to maximum length of over 3 feet. Like arms of primitive crinoid. Single stalks 3 inches diameter branch after 6 inches into five sub-stalks, each of which branches after 8 inches into five small, tapering tentacles or tendrils, giving each stalk a total of 25 tentacles.
     At top of torso blunt bulbous neck of lighter grey with gill-like suggestions holds yellowish five-pointed starfish-shaped apparent head covered with three-inch wiry cilia of various prismatic colours. Head thick and puffy, about 2 feet point to point, with three-inch flexible yellowish tubes projecting from each point. Slit in exact centre of top probably breathing aperture. At end of each tube is spherical expansion where yellowish membrane rolls back on handling to reveal glassy, red-irised globe, evidently an eye. Five slightly longer reddish tubes start from inner angles of starfish-shaped head and end in sac-like swellings of same colour which upon pressure open to bell-shaped orifices 2 inches maximum diameter and lined with sharp white tooth-like projections. Probable mouths. All these tubes, cilia, and points of starfish-head found folded tightly down; tubes and points clinging to bulbous neck and torso. Flexibility surprising despite vast toughness.
     At bottom of torso rough but dissimilarly functioning counterparts of head arrangements exist. Bulbous light-grey pseudo-neck, without gill suggestions, holds greenish five-pointed starfish-arrangement. Tough, muscular arms 4 feet long and tapering from 7 inches diameter at base to about 2.5 at point. To each point is attached small end of a greenish five-veined membraneous triangle 8 inches long and 6 wide at farther end. This is the paddle, fin, or pseudo-foot which has made prints in rocks from a thousand million to fifty or sixty million years old. From inner angles of starfish-arrangement project two-foot reddish tubes tapering from 3 inches diameter at base to 1 at tip. Orifices at tips. All these parts infinitely tough and leathery, but extremely flexible. Four-foot arms with paddles undoubtedly used for locomotion of some sort, marine or otherwise. When moved, display suggestions of exaggerated muscularity. As found, all these projections tightly folded over pseudo-neck and end of torso, corresponding to projections at other end.
     Cannot yet assign positively to animal or vegetable kingdom, but odds now favour animal. Probably represents incredibly advanced evolution of radiata without loss of certain primitive features. Echinoderm resemblances unmistakable despite local contradictory evidences. Wing structure puzzles in view of probable marine habitat, but may have use in water navigation. Symmetry is curiously vegetable-like, suggesting vegetable's essentially up-and-down structure rather than animal's fore-and-aft structure. Fabulously early date of evolution, preceding even simplest Archaean protozoa hitherto known, baffles all conjecture as to origin.
     Complete specimens have such uncanny resemblance to certain creatures of primal myth that suggestion of ancient existence outside antarctic becomes inevitable. Dyer and Pabodie have read Necronomicon and seen Clark Ashton Smith's nightmare paintings based on text, and will understand when I speak of Elder Things supposed to have created all earth-life as jest or mistake. Students have always thought conception formed from morbid imaginative treatment of very ancient tropical radiata. Also like prehistoric folklore things Wilmarth has spoken of—Cthulhu cult appendages, etc.
     Vast field of study opened. Deposits probably of late Cretaceous or early Eocene period, judging from associated specimens. Massive stalagmites deposited above them. Hard work hewing out, but toughness prevented damage. State of preservation miraculous, evidently owing to limestone action. No more found so far, but will resume search later. Job now to get fourteen huge specimens to camp without dogs, which bark furiously and can't be trusted near them. With nine men—three left to guard the dogs—we ought to manage the three sledges fairly well, though wind is bad. Must establish plane communication with McMurdo Sound and begin shipping material. But I've got to dissect one of these things before we take any rest. Wish I had a real laboratory here. Dyer better kick himself for having tried to stop my westward trip. First the world's greatest mountains, and then this. If this last isn't the high spot of the expedition, I don't know what is. We're made scientifically. Congrats, Pabodie, on the drill that opened up the cave. Now will Arkham please repeat description?
     The sensations of Pabodie and myself at receipt of this report were almost beyond description, nor were our companions much behind us in enthusiasm. McTighe, who had hastily translated a few high spots as they came from the droning receiving set, wrote out the entire message from his shorthand version as soon as Lake's operator signed off. All appreciated the epoch-making significance of the discovery, and I sent Lake congratulations as soon as the Arkham's operator had repeated back the descriptive parts as requested; and my example was followed by Sherman from his station at the McMurdo Sound supply cache, as well as by Capt. Douglas of the Arkham. Later, as head of the expedition, I added some remarks to be relayed through the Arkham to the outside world. Of course, rest was an absurd thought amidst this excitement; and my only wish was to get to Lake's camp as quickly as I could. It disappointed me when he sent word that a rising mountain gale made early aërial travel impossible.
     But within an hour and a half interest again rose to banish disappointment. Lake was sending more messages, and told of the completely successful transportation of the fourteen great specimens to the camp. It had been a hard pull, for the things were surprisingly heavy; but nine men had accomplished it very neatly. Now some of the party were hurriedly building a snow corral at a safe distance from the camp, to which the dogs could be brought for greater convenience in feeding. The specimens were laid out on the hard snow near the camp, save for one on which Lake was making crude attempts at dissection.
     This dissection seemed to be a greater task than had been expected; for despite the heat of a gasoline stove in the newly raised laboratory tent, the deceptively flexible tissues of the chosen specimen—a powerful and intact one—lost nothing of their more than leathery toughness. Lake was puzzled as to how he might make the requisite incisions without violence destructive enough to upset all the structural niceties he was looking for. He had, it is true, seven more perfect specimens; but these were too few to use up recklessly unless the cave might later yield an unlimited supply. Accordingly he removed the specimen and dragged in one which, though having remnants of the starfish-arrangements at both ends, was badly crushed and partly disrupted along one of the great torso furrows.
     Results, quickly reported over the wireless, were baffling and provocative indeed. Nothing like delicacy or accuracy was possible with instruments hardly able to cut the anomalous tissue, but the little that was achieved left us all awed and bewildered. Existing biology would have to be wholly revised, for this thing was no product of any cell-growth science knows about. There had been scarcely any mineral replacement, and despite an age of perhaps forty million years the internal organs were wholly intact. The leathery, undeteriorative, and almost indestructible quality was an inherent attribute of the thing's form of organisation; and pertained to some palaeogean cycle of invertebrate evolution utterly beyond our powers of speculation. At first all that Lake found was dry, but as the heated tent produced its thawing effect, organic moisture of pungent and offensive odour was encountered toward the thing's uninjured side. It was not blood, but a thick, dark-green fluid apparently answering the same purpose. By the time Lake reached this stage all 37 dogs had been brought to the still uncompleted corral near the camp; and even at that distance set up a savage barking and show of restlessness at the acrid, diffusive smell.
     Far from helping to place the strange entity, this provisional dissection merely deepened its mystery. All guesses about its external members had been correct, and on the evidence of these one could hardly hesitate to call the thing animal; but internal inspection brought up so many vegetable evidences that Lake was left hopelessly at sea. It had digestion and circulation, and eliminated waste matter through the reddish tubes of its starfish-shaped base. Cursorily, one would say that its respiratory apparatus handled oxygen rather than carbon dioxide; and there were odd evidences of air-storage chambers and methods of shifting respiration from the external orifice to at least two other fully developed breathing-systems—gills and pores. Clearly, it was amphibian and probably adapted to long airless hibernation-periods as well. Vocal organs seemed present in connexion with the main respiratory system, but they presented anomalies beyond immediate solution. Articulate speech, in the sense of syllable-utterance, seemed barely conceivable; but musical piping notes covering a wide range were highly probable. The muscular system was almost preternaturally developed.
     The nervous system was so complex and highly developed as to leave Lake aghast. Though excessively primitive and archaic in some respects, the thing had a set of ganglial centres and connectives arguing the very extremes of specialised development. Its five-lobed brain was surprisingly advanced; and there were signs of a sensory equipment, served in part through the wiry cilia of the head, involving factors alien to any other terrestrial organism. Probably it had more than five senses, so that its habits could not be predicted from any existing analogy. It must, Lake thought, have been a creature of keen sensitiveness and delicately differentiated functions in its primal world; much like the ants and bees of today. It reproduced like the vegetable cryptogams, especially the pteridophytes; having spore-cases at the tips of the wings and evidently developing from a thallus or prothallus.
     But to give it a name at this stage was mere folly. It looked like a radiate, but was clearly something more. It was partly vegetable, but had three-fourths of the essentials of animal structure. That it was marine in origin, its symmetrical contour and certain other attributes clearly indicated; yet one could not be exact as to the limit of its later adaptations. The wings, after all, held a persistent suggestion of the aërial. How it could have undergone its tremendously complex evolution on a new-born earth in time to leave prints in Archaean rocks was so far beyond conception as to make Lake whimsically recall the primal myths about Great Old Ones who filtered down from the stars and concocted earth-life as a joke or mistake; and the wild tales of cosmic hill things from Outside told by a folklorist colleague in Miskatonic's English department.
     Naturally, he considered the possibility of the pre-Cambrian prints' having been made by a less evolved ancestor of the present specimens; but quickly rejected this too facile theory upon considering the advanced structural qualities of the older fossils. If anything, the later contours shewed decadence rather than higher evolution. The size of the pseudo-feet had decreased, and the whole morphology seemed coarsened and simplified. Moreover, the nerves and organs just examined held singular suggestions of retrogression from forms still more complex. Atrophied and vestigial parts were surprisingly prevalent. Altogether, little could be said to have been solved; and Lake fell back on mythology for a provisional name—jocosely dubbing his finds The Elder Ones.
     At about 230 A.M., having decided to postpone further work and get a little rest, he covered the dissected organism with a tarpaulin, emerged from the laboratory tent, and studied the intact specimens with renewed interest. The ceaseless antarctic sun had begun to limber up their tissues a trifle, so that the head-points and tubes of two or three shewed signs of unfolding; but Lake did not believe there was any danger of immediate decomposition in the almost sub-zero air. He did, however, move all the undissected specimens closer together and throw a spare tent over them in order to keep off the direct solar rays. That would also help to keep their possible scent away from the dogs, whose hostile unrest was really becoming a problem even at their substantial distance and behind the higher and higher snow walls which an increased quota of the men were hastening to raise around their quarters. He had to weight down the corners of the tent-cloth with heavy blocks of snow to hold it in place amidst the rising gale, for the titan mountains seemed about to deliver some gravely severe blasts. Early apprehensions about sudden antarctic winds were revived, and under Atwood's supervision precautions were taken to bank the tents, new dog-corral, and crude aëroplane shelters with snow on the mountainward side. These latter shelters, begun with hard snow blocks during odd moments, were by no means as high as they should have been; and Lake finally detached all hands from other tasks to work on them.
     It was after four when Lake at last prepared to sign off and advised us all to share the rest period his outfit would take when the shelter walls were a little higher. He held some friendly chat with Pabodie over the ether, and repeated his praise of the really marvellous drills that had helped him make his discovery. Atwood also sent greetings and praises. I gave Lake a warm word of congratulation, owning up that he was right about the western trip; and we all agreed to get in touch by wireless at ten in the morning. If the gale was then over, Lake would send a plane for the party at my base. Just before retiring I despatched a final message to the Arkham with instructions about toning down the day's news for the outside world, since the full details seemed radical enough to rouse a wave of incredulity until further substantiated.

III.

None of us, I imagine, slept very heavily or continuously that morning; for both the excitement of Lake's discovery and the mounting fury of the wind were against such a thing. So savage was the blast, even where we were, that we could not help wondering how much worse it was at Lake's camp, directly under the vast unknown peaks that bred and delivered it. McTighe was awake at ten o'clock and tried to get Lake on the wireless, as agreed, but some electrical condition in the disturbed air to the westward seemed to prevent communication. We did, however, get the Arkham, and Douglas told me that he had likewise been vainly trying to reach Lake. He had not known about the wind, for very little was blowing at McMurdo Sound despite its persistent rage where we were.
     Throughout the day we all listened anxiously and tried to get Lake at intervals, but invariably without results. About noon a positive frenzy of wind stampeded out of the west, causing us to fear for the safety of our camp; but it eventually died down, with only a moderate relapse at 2 P.M. After three o'clock it was very quiet, and we redoubled our efforts to get Lake. Reflecting that he had four planes, each provided with an excellent short-wave outfit, we could not imagine any ordinary accident capable of crippling all his wireless equipment at once. Nevertheless the stony silence continued; and when we thought of the delirious force the wind must have had in his locality we could not help making the most direful conjectures.
     By six o'clock our fears had become intense and definite, and after a wireless consultation with Douglas and Thorfinnssen I resolved to take steps toward investigation. The fifth aëroplane, which we had left at the McMurdo Sound supply cache with Sherman and two sailors, was in good shape and ready for instant use; and it seemed that the very emergency for which it had been saved was now upon us. I got Sherman by wireless and ordered him to join me with the plane and the two sailors at the southern base as quickly as possible; the air conditions being apparently highly favourable. We then talked over the personnel of the coming investigation party; and decided that we would include all hands, together with the sledge and dogs which I had kept with me. Even so great a load would not be too much for one of the huge planes built to our especial orders for heavy machinery transportation. At intervals I still tried to reach Lake with the wireless, but all to no purpose.
     Sherman, with the sailors Gunnarsson and Larsen, took off at 730; and reported a quiet flight from several points on the wing. They arrived at our base at midnight, and all hands at once discussed the next move. It was risky business sailing over the antarctic in a single aëroplane without any line of bases, but no one drew back from what seemed like the plainest necessity. We turned in at two o'clock for a brief rest after some preliminary loading of the plane, but were up again in four hours to finish the loading and packing.
     At 715 A.M., January 25th, we started flying northwestward under McTighe's pilotage with ten men, seven dogs, a sledge, a fuel and food supply, and other items including the plane's wireless outfit. The atmosphere was clear, fairly quiet, and relatively mild in temperature; and we anticipated very little trouble in reaching the latitude and longitude designated by Lake as the site of his camp. Our apprehensions were over what we might find, or fail to find, at the end of our journey; for silence continued to answer all calls despatched to the camp.
     Every incident of that four-and-a-half-hour flight is burned into my recollection because of its crucial position in my life. It marked my loss, at the age of fifty-four, of all that peace and balance which the normal mind possesses through its accustomed conception of external Nature and Nature's laws. Thenceforward the ten of us—but the student Danforth and myself above all others—were to face a hideously amplified world of lurking horrors which nothing can erase from our emotions, and which we would refrain from sharing with mankind in general if we could. The newspapers have printed the bulletins we sent from the moving plane; telling of our non-stop course, our two battles with treacherous upper-air gales, our glimpse of the broken surface where Lake had sunk his mid-journey shaft three days before, and our sight of a group of those strange fluffy snow-cylinders noted by Amundsen and Byrd as rolling in the wind across the endless leagues of frozen plateau. There came a point, though, when our sensations could not be conveyed in any words the press would understand; and a later point when we had to adopt an actual rule of strict censorship.
     The sailor Larsen was first to spy the jagged line of witch-like cones and pinnacles ahead, and his shouts sent everyone to the windows of the great cabined plane. Despite our speed, they were very slow in gaining prominence; hence we knew that they must be infinitely far off, and visible only because of their abnormal height. Little by little, however, they rose grimly into the western sky; allowing us to distinguish various bare, bleak, blackish summits, and to catch the curious sense of phantasy which they inspired as seen in the reddish antarctic light against the provocative background of iridescent ice-dust clouds. In the whole spectacle there was a persistent, pervasive hint of stupendous secrecy and potential revelation; as if these stark, nightmare spires marked the pylons of a frightful gateway into forbidden spheres of dream, and complex gulfs of remote time, space, and ultra-dimensionality. I could not help feeling that they were evil things—mountains of madness whose farther slopes looked out over some accursed ultimate abyss. That seething, half-luminous cloud-background held ineffable suggestions of a vague, ethereal beyondness far more than terrestrially spatial; and gave appalling reminders of the utter remoteness, separateness, desolation, and aeon-long death of this untrodden and unfathomed austral world.
     It was young Danforth who drew our notice to the curious regularities of the higher mountain skyline—regularities like clinging fragments of perfect cubes, which Lake had mentioned in his messages, and which indeed justified his comparison with the dream-like suggestions of primordial temple-ruins on cloudy Asian mountain-tops so subtly and strangely painted by Roerich. There was indeed something hauntingly Roerich-like about this whole unearthly continent of mountainous mystery. I had felt it in October when we first caught sight of Victoria Land, and I felt it afresh now. I felt, too, another wave of uneasy consciousness of Archaean mythical resemblances; of how disturbingly this lethal realm corresponded to the evilly famed plateau of Leng in the primal writings. Mythologists have placed Leng in Central Asia; but the racial memory of man—or of his predecessors—is long, and it may well be that certain tales have come down from lands and mountains and temples of horror earlier than Asia and earlier than any human world we know. A few daring mystics have hinted at a pre-Pleistocene origin for the fragmentary Pnakotic Manuscripts, and have suggested that the devotees of Tsathoggua were as alien to mankind as Tsathoggua itself. Leng, wherever in space or time it might brood, was not a region I would care to be in or near; nor did I relish the proximity of a world that had ever bred such ambiguous and Archaean monstrosities as those Lake had just mentioned. At the moment I felt sorry that I had ever read the abhorred Necronomicon, or talked so much with that unpleasantly erudite folklorist Wilmarth at the university.
     This mood undoubtedly served to aggravate my reaction to the bizarre mirage which burst upon us from the increasingly opalescent zenith as we drew near the mountains and began to make out the cumulative undulations of the foothills. I had seen dozens of polar mirages during the preceding weeks, some of them quite as uncanny and fantastically vivid as the present sample; but this one had a wholly novel and obscure quality of menacing symbolism, and I shuddered as the seething labyrinth of fabulous walls and towers and minarets loomed out of the troubled ice-vapours above our heads.
     The effect was that of a Cyclopean city of no architecture known to man or to human imagination, with vast aggregations of night-black masonry embodying monstrous perversions of geometrical laws and attaining the most grotesque extremes of sinister bizarrerie. There were truncated cones, sometimes terraced or fluted, surmounted by tall cylindrical shafts here and there bulbously enlarged and often capped with tiers of thinnish scalloped discs; and strange, beetling, table-like constructions suggesting piles of multitudinous rectangular slabs or circular plates or five-pointed stars with each one overlapping the one beneath. There were composite cones and pyramids either alone or surmounting cylinders or cubes or flatter truncated cones and pyramids, and occasional needle-like spires in curious clusters of five. All of these febrile structures seemed knit together by tubular bridges crossing from one to the other at various dizzy heights, and the implied scale of the whole was terrifying and oppressive in its sheer giganticism. The general type of mirage was not unlike some of the wilder forms observed and drawn by the Arctic whaler Scoresby in 1820; but at this time and place, with those dark, unknown mountain peaks soaring stupendously ahead, that anomalous elder-world discovery in our minds, and the pall of probable disaster enveloping the greater part of our expedition, we all seemed to find in it a taint of latent malignity and infinitely evil portent.
     I was glad when the mirage began to break up, though in the process the various nightmare turrets and cones assumed distorted temporary forms of even vaster hideousness. As the whole illusion dissolved to churning opalescence we began to look earthward again, and saw that our journey's end was not far off. The unknown mountains ahead rose dizzyingly up like a fearsome rampart of giants, their curious regularities shewing with startling clearness even without a field-glass. We were over the lowest foothills now, and could see amidst the snow, ice, and bare patches of their main plateau a couple of darkish spots which we took to be Lake's camp and boring. The higher foothills shot up between five and six miles away, forming a range almost distinct from the terrifying line of more than Himalayan peaks beyond them. At length Ropes—the student who had relieved McTighe at the controls—began to head downward toward the left-hand dark spot whose size marked it as the camp. As he did so, McTighe sent out the last uncensored wireless message the world was to receive from our expedition.
     Everyone, of course, has read the brief and unsatisfying bulletins of the rest of our antarctic sojourn. Some hours after our landing we sent a guarded report of the tragedy we found, and reluctantly announced the wiping out of the whole Lake party by the frightful wind of the preceding day, or of the night before that. Eleven known dead, young Gedney missing. People pardoned our hazy lack of details through realisation of the shock the sad event must have caused us, and believed us when we explained that the mangling action of the wind had rendered all eleven bodies unsuitable for transportation outside. Indeed, I flatter myself that even in the midst of our distress, utter bewilderment, and soul-clutching horror, we scarcely went beyond the truth in any specific instance. The tremendous significance lies in what we dared not tell—what I would not tell now but for the need of warning others off from nameless terrors.
     It is a fact that the wind had wrought dreadful havoc. Whether all could have lived through it, even without the other thing, is gravely open to doubt. The storm, with its fury of madly driven ice-particles, must have been beyond anything our expedition had encountered before. One aëroplane shelter—all, it seems, had been left in a far too flimsy and inadequate state—was nearly pulverised; and the derrick at the distant boring was entirely shaken to pieces. The exposed metal of the grounded planes and drilling machinery was bruised into a high polish, and two of the small tents were flattened despite their snow banking. Wooden surfaces left out in the blast were pitted and denuded of paint, and all signs of tracks in the snow were completely obliterated. It is also true that we found none of the Archaean biological objects in a condition to take outside as a whole. We did gather some minerals from a vast tumbled pile, including several of the greenish soapstone fragments whose odd five-pointed rounding and faint patterns of grouped dots caused so many doubtful comparisons; and some fossil bones, among which were the most typical of the curiously injured specimens.
     None of the dogs survived, their hurriedly built snow enclosure near the camp being almost wholly destroyed. The wind may have done that, though the greater breakage on the side next the camp, which was not the windward one, suggests an outward leap or break of the frantic beasts themselves. All three sledges were gone, and we have tried to explain that the wind may have blown them off into the unknown. The drill and ice-melting machinery at the boring were too badly damaged to warrant salvage, so we used them to choke up that subtly disturbing gateway to the past which Lake had blasted. We likewise left at the camp the two most shaken-up of the planes; since our surviving party had only four real pilots—Sherman, Danforth, McTighe, and Ropes—in all, with Danforth in a poor nervous shape to navigate. We brought back all the books, scientific equipment, and other incidentals we could find, though much was rather unaccountably blown away. Spare tents and furs were either missing or badly out of condition.
     It was approximately 4 P.M., after wide plane cruising had forced us to give Gedney up for lost, that we sent our guarded message to the Arkham for relaying; and I think we did well to keep it as calm and non-committal as we succeeded in doing. The most we said about agitation concerned our dogs, whose frantic uneasiness near the biological specimens was to be expected from poor Lake's accounts. We did not mention, I think, their display of the same uneasiness when sniffing around the queer greenish soapstones and certain other objects in the disordered region; objects including scientific instruments, aëroplanes, and machinery both at the camp and at the boring, whose parts had been loosened, moved, or otherwise tampered with by winds that must have harboured singular curiosity and investigativeness.
     About the fourteen biological specimens we were pardonably indefinite. We said that the only ones we discovered were damaged, but that enough was left of them to prove Lake's description wholly and impressively accurate. It was hard work keeping our personal emotions out of this matter—and we did not mention numbers or say exactly how we had found those which we did find. We had by that time agreed not to transmit anything suggesting madness on the part of Lake's men, and it surely looked like madness to find six imperfect monstrosities carefully buried upright in nine-foot snow graves under five-pointed mounds punched over with groups of dots in patterns exactly like those on the queer greenish soapstones dug up from Mesozoic or Tertiary times. The eight perfect specimens mentioned by Lake seemed to have been completely blown away. 
     We were careful, too, about the public's general peace of mind; hence Danforth and I said little about that frightful trip over the mountains the next day. It was the fact that only a radically lightened plane could possibly cross a range of such height which mercifully limited that scouting tour to the two of us. On our return at 1 A.M. Danforth was close to hysterics, but kept an admirably stiff upper lip. It took no persuasion to make him promise not to shew our sketches and the other things we brought away in our pockets, not to say anything more to the others than what we had agreed to relay outside, and to hide our camera films for private development later on; so that part of my present story will be as new to Pabodie, McTighe, Ropes, Sherman, and the rest as it will be to the world in general. Indeed—Danforth is closer mouthed than I; for he saw—or thinks he saw—one thing he will not tell even me.
     As all know, our report included a tale of a hard ascent; a confirmation of Lake's opinion that the great peaks are of Archaean slate and other very primal crumpled strata unchanged since at least middle Comanchian times; a conventional comment on the regularity of the clinging cube and rampart formations; a decision that the cave-mouths indicate dissolved calcareous veins; a conjecture that certain slopes and passes would permit of the scaling and crossing of the entire range by seasoned mountaineers; and a remark that the mysterious other side holds a lofty and immense super-plateau as ancient and unchanging as the mountains themselves—20,000 feet in elevation, with grotesque rock formations protruding through a thin glacial layer and with low gradual foothills between the general plateau surface and the sheer precipices of the highest peaks.
     This body of data is in every respect true so far as it goes, and it completely satisfied the men at the camp. We laid our absence of sixteen hours—a longer time than our announced flying, landing, reconnoitring, and rock-collecting programme called for—to a long mythical spell of adverse wind conditions; and told truly of our landing on the farther foothills. Fortunately our tale sounded realistic and prosaic enough not to tempt any of the others into emulating our flight. Had any tried to do that, I would have used every ounce of my persuasion to stop them—and I do not know what Danforth would have done. While we were gone, Pabodie, Sherman, Ropes, McTighe, and Williamson had worked like beavers over Lake's two best planes; fitting them again for use despite the altogether unaccountable juggling of their operative mechanism.
     We decided to load all the planes the next morning and start back for our old base as soon as possible. Even though indirect, that was the safest way to work toward McMurdo Sound; for a straight-line flight across the most utterly unknown stretches of the aeon-dead continent would involve many additional hazards. Further exploration was hardly feasible in view of our tragic decimation and the ruin of our drilling machinery; and the doubts and horrors around us—which we did not reveal—made us wish only to escape from this austral world of desolation and brooding madness as swiftly as we could.
     As the public knows, our return to the world was accomplished without further disasters. All planes reached the old base on the evening of the next day—January 27th—after a swift non-stop flight; and on the 28th we made McMurdo Sound in two laps, the one pause being very brief, and occasioned by a faulty rudder in the furious wind over the ice-shelf after we had cleared the great plateau. In five days more the Arkham and Miskatonic, with all hands and equipment on board, were shaking clear of the thickening field ice and working up Ross Sea with the mocking mountains of Victoria Land looming westward against a troubled antarctic sky and twisting the wind's wails into a wide-ranged musical piping which chilled my soul to the quick. Less than a fortnight later we left the last hint of polar land behind us, and thanked heaven that we were clear of a haunted, accursed realm where life and death, space and time, have made black and blasphemous alliances in the unknown epochs since matter first writhed and swam on the planet's scarce-cooled crust.
     Since our return we have all constantly worked to discourage antarctic exploration, and have kept certain doubts and guesses to ourselves with splendid unity and faithfulness. Even young Danforth, with his nervous breakdown, has not flinched or babbled to his doctors—indeed, as I have said, there is one thing he thinks he alone saw which he will not tell even me, though I think it would help his psychological state if he would consent to do so. It might explain and relieve much, though perhaps the thing was no more than the delusive aftermath of an earlier shock. That is the impression I gather after those rare irresponsible moments when he whispers disjointed things to me—things which he repudiates vehemently as soon as he gets a grip on himself again.
     It will be hard work deterring others from the great white south, and some of our efforts may directly harm our cause by drawing inquiring notice. We might have known from the first that human curiosity is undying, and that the results we announced would be enough to spur others ahead on the same age-long pursuit of the unknown. Lake's reports of those biological monstrosities had aroused naturalists and palaeontologists to the highest pitch; though we were sensible enough not to shew the detached parts we had taken from the actual buried specimens, or our photographs of those specimens as they were found. We also refrained from shewing the more puzzling of the scarred bones and greenish soapstones; while Danforth and I have closely guarded the pictures we took or drew on the super-plateau across the range, and the crumpled things we smoothed, studied in terror, and brought away in our pockets. But now that Starkweather-Moore party is organising, and with a thoroughness far beyond anything our outfit attempted. If not dissuaded, they will get to the innermost nucleus of the antarctic and melt and bore till they bring up that which may end the world we know. So I must break through all reticences at last—even about that ultimate nameless thing beyond the mountains of madness.

IV.

It is only with vast hesitancy and repugnance that I let my mind go back to Lake's camp and what we really found there—and to that other thing beyond the frightful mountain wall. I am constantly tempted to shirk the details, and to let hints stand for actual facts and ineluctable deductions. I hope I have said enough already to let me glide briefly over the rest; the rest, that is, of the horror at the camp. I have told of the wind-ravaged terrain, the damaged shelters, the disarranged machinery, the varied uneasinesses of our dogs, the missing sledges and other items, the deaths of men and dogs, the absence of Gedney, and the six insanely buried biological specimens, strangely sound in texture for all their structural injuries, from a world forty million years dead. I do not recall whether I mentioned that upon checking up the canine bodies we found one dog missing. We did not think much about that till later—indeed, only Danforth and I have thought of it at all.
     The principal things I have been keeping back relate to the bodies, and to certain subtle points which may or may not lend a hideous and incredible kind of rationale to the apparent chaos. At the time I tried to keep the men's minds off those points; for it was so much simpler—so much more normal—to lay everything to an outbreak of madness on the part of some of Lake's party. From the look of things, that daemon mountain wind must have been enough to drive any man mad in the midst of this centre of all earthly mystery and desolation.
     The crowning abnormality, of course, was the condition of the bodies—men and dogs alike. They had all been in some terrible kind of conflict, and were torn and mangled in fiendish and altogether inexplicable ways. Death, so far as we could judge, had in each case come from strangulation or laceration. The dogs had evidently started the trouble, for the state of their ill-built corral bore witness to its forcible breakage from within. It had been set some distance from the camp because of the hatred of the animals for those hellish Archaean organisms, but the precaution seemed to have been taken in vain. When left alone in that monstrous wind behind flimsy walls of insufficient height they must have stampeded—whether from the wind itself, or from some subtle, increasing odour emitted by the nightmare specimens, one could not say. Those specimens, of course, had been covered with a tent-cloth; yet the low antarctic sun had beat steadily upon that cloth, and Lake had mentioned that solar heat tended to make the strangely sound and tough tissues of the things relax and expand. Perhaps the wind had whipped the cloth from over them, and jostled them about in such a way that their more pungent olfactory qualities became manifest despite their unbelievable antiquity.
     But whatever had happened, it was hideous and revolting enough. Perhaps I had better put squeamishness aside and tell the worst at last—though with a categorical statement of opinion, based on the first-hand observations and most rigid deductions of both Danforth and myself, that the then missing Gedney was in no way responsible for the loathsome horrors we found. I have said that the bodies were frightfully mangled. Now I must add that some were incised and subtracted from in the most curious, cold-blooded, and inhuman fashion. It was the same with dogs and men. All the healthier, fatter bodies, quadrupedal or bipedal, had had their most solid masses of tissue cut out and removed, as by a careful butcher; and around them was a strange sprinkling of salt—taken from the ravaged provision-chests on the planes—which conjured up the most horrible associations. The thing had occurred in one of the crude aëroplane shelters from which the plane had been dragged out, and subsequent winds had effaced all tracks which could have supplied any plausible theory. Scattered bits of clothing, roughly slashed from the human incision-subjects, hinted no clues. It is useless to bring up the half-impression of certain faint snow-prints in one shielded corner of the ruined enclosure—because that impression did not concern human prints at all, but was clearly mixed up with all the talk of fossil prints which poor Lake had been giving throughout the preceding weeks. One had to be careful of one's imagination in the lee of those overshadowing mountains of madness.
     As I have indicated, Gedney and one dog turned out to be missing in the end. When we came on that terrible shelter we had missed two dogs and two men; but the fairly unharmed dissecting tent, which we entered after investigating the monstrous graves, had something to reveal. It was not as Lake had left it, for the covered parts of the primal monstrosity had been removed from the improvised table. Indeed, we had already realised that one of the six imperfect and insanely buried things we had found—the one with the trace of a peculiarly hateful odour—must represent the collected sections of the entity which Lake had tried to analyse. On and around that laboratory table were strown other things, and it did not take long for us to guess that those things were the carefully though oddly and inexpertly dissected parts of one man and one dog. I shall spare the feelings of survivors by omitting mention of the man's identity. Lake's anatomical instruments were missing, but there were evidences of their careful cleansing. The gasoline stove was also gone, though around it we found a curious litter of matches. We buried the human parts beside the other ten men, and the canine parts with the other 35 dogs. Concerning the bizarre smudges on the laboratory table, and on the jumble of roughly handled illustrated books scattered near it, we were much too bewildered to speculate.
     This formed the worst of the camp horror, but other things were equally perplexing. The disappearance of Gedney, the one dog, the eight uninjured biological specimens, the three sledges, and certain instruments, illustrated technical and scientific books, writing materials, electric torches and batteries, food and fuel, heating apparatus, spare tents, fur suits, and the like, was utterly beyond sane conjecture; as were likewise the spatter-fringed ink-blots on certain pieces of paper, and the evidences of curious alien fumbling and experimentation around the planes and all other mechanical devices both at the camp and at the boring. The dogs seemed to abhor this oddly disordered machinery. Then, too, there was the upsetting of the larder, the disappearance of certain staples, and the jarringly comical heap of tin cans pried open in the most unlikely ways and at the most unlikely places. The profusion of scattered matches, intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor enigma; as did the two or three tent-cloths and fur suits which we found lying about with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably due to clumsy efforts at unimaginable adaptations. The maltreatment of the human and canine bodies, and the crazy burial of the damaged Archaean specimens, were all of a piece with this apparent disintegrative madness. In view of just such an eventuality as the present one, we carefully photographed all the main evidences of insane disorder at the camp; and shall use the prints to buttress our pleas against the departure of the proposed Starkweather-Moore Expedition.
     Our first act after finding the bodies in the shelter was to photograph and open the row of insane graves with the five-pointed snow mounds. We could not help noticing the resemblance of these monstrous mounds, with their clusters of grouped dots, to poor Lake's descriptions of the strange greenish soapstones; and when we came on some of the soapstones themselves in the great mineral pile we found the likeness very close indeed. The whole general formation, it must be made clear, seemed abominably suggestive of the starfish-head of the Archaean entities; and we agreed that the suggestion must have worked potently upon the sensitised minds of Lake's overwrought party. Our own first sight of the actual buried entities formed a horrible moment, and sent the imaginations of Pabodie and myself back to some of the shocking primal myths we had read and heard. We all agreed that the mere sight and continued presence of the things must have coöperated with the oppressive polar solitude and daemon mountain wind in driving Lake's party mad.
     For madness—centring in Gedney as the only possible surviving agent—was the explanation spontaneously adopted by everybody so far as spoken utterance was concerned; though I will not be so naive as to deny that each of us may have harboured wild guesses which sanity forbade him to formulate completely. Sherman, Pabodie, and McTighe made an exhaustive aëroplane cruise over all the surrounding territory in the afternoon, sweeping the horizon with field-glasses in quest of Gedney and of the various missing things; but nothing came to light. The party reported that the titan barrier range extended endlessly to right and left alike, without any diminution in height or essential structure. On some of the peaks, though, the regular cube and rampart formations were bolder and plainer; having doubly fantastic similitudes to Roerich-painted Asian hill ruins. The distribution of cryptical cave-mouths on the black snow-denuded summits seemed roughly even as far as the range could be traced.
     In spite of all the prevailing horrors we were left with enough sheer scientific zeal and adventurousness to wonder about the unknown realm beyond those mysterious mountains. As our guarded messages stated, we rested at midnight after our day of terror and bafflement; but not without a tentative plan for one or more range-crossing altitude flights in a lightened plane with aërial camera and geologist's outfit, beginning the following morning. It was decided that Danforth and I try it first, and we awaked at 7 A.M. intending an early trip; though heavy winds—mentioned in our brief bulletin to the outside world—delayed our start till nearly nine o'clock.
     I have already repeated the non-committal story we told the men at camp—and relayed outside—after our return sixteen hours later. It is now my terrible duty to amplify this account by filling in the merciful blanks with hints of what we really saw in the hidden trans-montane world—hints of the revelations which have finally driven Danforth to a nervous collapse. I wish he would add a really frank word about the thing which he thinks he alone saw—even though it was probably a nervous delusion—and which was perhaps the last straw that put him where he is; but he is firm against that. All I can do is to repeat his later disjointed whispers about what set him shrieking as the plane soared back through the wind-tortured mountain pass after that real and tangible shock which I shared. This will form my last word. If the plain signs of surviving elder horrors in what I disclose be not enough to keep others from meddling with the inner antarctic—or at least from prying too deeply beneath the surface of that ultimate waste of forbidden secrets and unhuman, aeon-cursed desolation—the responsibility for unnamable and perhaps immensurable evils will not be mine.
     Danforth and I, studying the notes made by Pabodie in his afternoon flight and checking up with a sextant, had calculated that the lowest available pass in the range lay somewhat to the right of us, within sight of camp, and about 23,000 or 24,000 feet above sea-level. For this point, then, we first headed in the lightened plane as we embarked on our flight of discovery. The camp itself, on foothills which sprang from a high continental plateau, was some 12,000 feet in altitude; hence the actual height increase necessary was not so vast as it might seem. Nevertheless we were acutely conscious of the rarefied air and intense cold as we rose; for on account of visibility conditions we had to leave the cabin windows open. We were dressed, of course, in our heaviest furs.
     As we drew near the forbidding peaks, dark and sinister above the line of crevasse-riven snow and interstitial glaciers, we noticed more and more the curiously regular formations clinging to the slopes; and thought again of the strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich. The ancient and wind-weathered rock strata fully verified all of Lake's bulletins, and proved that these hoary pinnacles had been towering up in exactly the same way since a surprisingly early time in earth's history—perhaps over fifty million years. How much higher they had once been, it was futile to guess; but everything about this strange region pointed to obscure atmospheric influences unfavourable to change, and calculated to retard the usual climatic processes of rock disintegration.
     But it was the mountainside tangle of regular cubes, ramparts, and cave-mouths which fascinated and disturbed us most. I studied them with a field-glass and took aërial photographs whilst Danforth drove; and at times relieved him at the controls—though my aviation knowledge was purely an amateur's—in order to let him use the binoculars. We could easily see that much of the material of the things was a lightish Archaean quartzite, unlike any formation visible over broad areas of the general surface; and that their regularity was extreme and uncanny to an extent which poor Lake had scarcely hinted.
     As he had said, their edges were crumbled and rounded from untold aeons of savage weathering; but their preternatural solidity and tough material had saved them from obliteration. Many parts, especially those closest to the slopes, seemed identical in substance with the surrounding rock surface. The whole arrangement looked like the ruins of Machu Picchu in the Andes, or the primal foundation-walls of Kish as dug up by the Oxford–Field Museum Expedition in 1929; and both Danforth and I obtained that occasional impression of separate Cyclopean blocks which Lake had attributed to his flight-companion Carroll. How to account for such things in this place was frankly beyond me, and I felt queerly humbled as a geologist. Igneous formations often have strange regularities—like the famous Giants' Causeway in Ireland—but this stupendous range, despite Lake's original suspicion of smoking cones, was above all else non-volcanic in evident structure.
     The curious cave-mouths, near which the odd formations seemed most abundant, presented another albeit a lesser puzzle because of their regularity of outline. They were, as Lake's bulletin had said, often approximately square or semicircular; as if the natural orifices had been shaped to greater symmetry by some magic hand. Their numerousness and wide distribution were remarkable, and suggested that the whole region was honeycombed with tunnels dissolved out of limestone strata. Such glimpses as we secured did not extend far within the caverns, but we saw that they were apparently clear of stalactites and stalagmites. Outside, those parts of the mountain slopes adjoining the apertures seemed invariably smooth and regular; and Danforth thought that the slight cracks and pittings of the weathering tended toward unusual patterns. Filled as he was with the horrors and strangenesses discovered at the camp, he hinted that the pittings vaguely resembled those baffling groups of dots sprinkled over the primeval greenish soapstones, so hideously duplicated on the madly conceived snow mounds above those six buried monstrosities.
     We had risen gradually in flying over the higher foothills and along toward the relatively low pass we had selected. As we advanced we occasionally looked down at the snow and ice of the land route, wondering whether we could have attempted the trip with the simpler equipment of earlier days. Somewhat to our surprise we saw that the terrain was far from difficult as such things go; and that despite the crevasses and other bad spots it would not have been likely to deter the sledges of a Scott, a Shackleton, or an Amundsen. Some of the glaciers appeared to lead up to wind-bared passes with unusual continuity, and upon reaching our chosen pass we found that its case formed no exception.
     Our sensations of tense expectancy as we prepared to round the crest and peer out over an untrodden world can hardly be described on paper; even though we had no cause to think the regions beyond the range essentially different from those already seen and traversed. The touch of evil mystery in these barrier mountains, and in the beckoning sea of opalescent sky glimpsed betwixt their summits, was a highly subtle and attenuated matter not to be explained in literal words. Rather was it an affair of vague psychological symbolism and aesthetic association—a thing mixed up with exotic poetry and paintings, and with archaic myths lurking in shunned and forbidden volumes. Even the wind's burden held a peculiar strain of conscious malignity; and for a second it seemed that the composite sound included a bizarre musical whistling or piping over a wide range as the blast swept in and out of the omnipresent and resonant cave-mouths. There was a cloudy note of reminiscent repulsion in this sound, as complex and unplaceable as any of the other dark impressions.
     We were now, after a slow ascent, at a height of 23,570 feet according to the aneroid; and had left the region of clinging snow definitely below us. Up here were only dark, bare rock slopes and the start of rough-ribbed glaciers—but with those provocative cubes, ramparts, and echoing cave-mouths to add a portent of the unnatural, the fantastic, and the dream-like. Looking along the line of high peaks, I thought I could see the one mentioned by poor Lake, with a rampart exactly on top. It seemed to be half-lost in a queer antarctic haze; such a haze, perhaps, as had been responsible for Lake's early notion of volcanism. The pass loomed directly before us, smooth and windswept between its jagged and malignly frowning pylons. Beyond it was a sky fretted with swirling vapours and lighted by the low polar sun—the sky of that mysterious farther realm upon which we felt no human eye had ever gazed.
     A few more feet of altitude and we would behold that realm. Danforth and I, unable to speak except in shouts amidst the howling, piping wind that raced through the pass and added to the noise of the unmuffled engines, exchanged eloquent glances. And then, having gained those last few feet, we did indeed stare across the momentous divide and over the unsampled secrets of an elder and utterly alien earth.

V.

I think that both of us simultaneously cried out in mixed awe, wonder, terror, and disbelief in our own senses as we finally cleared the pass and saw what lay beyond. Of course we must have had some natural theory in the back of our heads to steady our faculties for the moment. Probably we thought of such things as the grotesquely weathered stones of the Garden of the Gods in Colorado, or the fantastically symmetrical wind-carved rocks of the Arizona desert. Perhaps we even half thought the sight a mirage like that we had seen the morning before on first approaching those mountains of madness. We must have had some such normal notions to fall back upon as our eyes swept that limitless, tempest-scarred plateau and grasped the almost endless labyrinth of colossal, regular, and geometrically eurhythmic stone masses which reared their crumbled and pitted crests above a glacial sheet not more than forty or fifty feet deep at its thickest, and in places obviously thinner.
     The effect of the monstrous sight was indescribable, for some fiendish violation of known natural law seemed certain at the outset. Here, on a hellishly ancient table-land fully 20,000 feet high, and in a climate deadly to habitation since a pre-human age not less than 500,000 years ago, there stretched nearly to the vision's limit a tangle of orderly stone which only the desperation of mental self-defence could possibly attribute to any but a conscious and artificial cause. We had previously dismissed, so far as serious thought was concerned, any theory that the cubes and ramparts of the mountainsides were other than natural in origin. How could they be otherwise, when man himself could scarcely have been differentiated from the great apes at the time when this region succumbed to the present unbroken reign of glacial death?
     Yet now the sway of reason seemed irrefutably shaken, for this Cyclopean maze of squared, curved, and angled blocks had features which cut off all comfortable refuge. It was, very clearly, the blasphemous city of the mirage in stark, objective, and ineluctable reality. That damnable portent had had a material basis after all—there had been some horizontal stratum of ice-dust in the upper air, and this shocking stone survival had projected its image across the mountains according to the simple laws of reflection. Of course the phantom had been twisted and exaggerated, and had contained things which the real source did not contain; yet now, as we saw that real source, we thought it even more hideous and menacing than its distant image.
     Only the incredible, unhuman massiveness of these vast stone towers and ramparts had saved the frightful thing from utter annihilation in the hundreds of thousands—perhaps millions—of years it had brooded there amidst the blasts of a bleak upland. Corona Mundi . . . Roof of the World . . . All sorts of fantastic phrases sprang to our lips as we looked dizzily down at the unbelievable spectacle. I thought again of the eldritch primal myths that had so persistently haunted me since my first sight of this dead antarctic world—of the daemoniac plateau of Leng, of the Mi-Go, or Abominable Snow-Men of the Himalayas, of the Pnakotic Manuscripts with their pre-human implications, of the Cthulhu cult, of the Necronomicon, and of the Hyperborean legends of formless Tsathoggua and the worse than formless star-spawn associated with that semi-entity.
     For boundless miles in every direction the thing stretched off with very little thinning; indeed, as our eyes followed it to the right and left along the base of the low, gradual foothills which separated it from the actual mountain rim, we decided that we could see no thinning at all except for an interruption at the left of the pass through which we had come. We had merely struck, at random, a limited part of something of incalculable extent. The foothills were more sparsely sprinkled with grotesque stone structures, linking the terrible city to the already familiar cubes and ramparts which evidently formed its mountain outposts. These latter, as well as the queer cave-mouths, were as thick on the inner as on the outer sides of the mountains.
     The nameless stone labyrinth consisted, for the most part, of walls from 10 to 150 feet in ice-clear height, and of a thickness varying from five to ten feet. It was composed mostly of prodigious blocks of dark primordial slate, schist, and sandstone—blocks in many cases as large as 4 × 6 × 8 feet—though in several places it seemed to be carved out of a solid, uneven bed-rock of pre-Cambrian slate. The buildings were far from equal in size; there being innumerable honeycomb-arrangements of enormous extent as well as smaller separate structures. The general shape of these things tended to be conical, pyramidal, or terraced; though there were many perfect cylinders, perfect cubes, clusters of cubes, and other rectangular forms, and a peculiar sprinkling of angled edifices whose five-pointed ground plan roughly suggested modern fortifications. The builders had made constant and expert use of the principle of the arch, and domes had probably existed in the city's heyday.
     The whole tangle was monstrously weathered, and the glacial surface from which the towers projected was strewn with fallen blocks and immemorial debris. Where the glaciation was transparent we could see the lower parts of the gigantic piles, and noticed the ice-preserved stone bridges which connected the different towers at varying distances above the ground. On the exposed walls we could detect the scarred places where other and higher bridges of the same sort had existed. Closer inspection revealed countless largish windows; some of which were closed with shutters of a petrified material originally wood, though most gaped open in a sinister and menacing fashion. Many of the ruins, of course, were roofless, and with uneven though wind-rounded upper edges; whilst others, of a more sharply conical or pyramidal model or else protected by higher surrounding structures, preserved intact outlines despite the omnipresent crumbling and pitting. With the field-glass we could barely make out what seemed to be sculptural decorations in horizontal bands—decorations including those curious groups of dots whose presence on the ancient soapstones now assumed a vastly larger significance.
     In many places the buildings were totally ruined and the ice-sheet deeply riven from various geologic causes. In other places the stonework was worn down to the very level of the glaciation. One broad swath, extending from the plateau's interior to a cleft in the foothills about a mile to the left of the pass we had traversed, was wholly free from buildings; and probably represented, we concluded, the course of some great river which in Tertiary times—millions of years ago—had poured through the city and into some prodigious subterranean abyss of the great barrier range. Certainly, this was above all a region of caves, gulfs, and underground secrets beyond human penetration.
     Looking back to our sensations, and recalling our dazedness at viewing this monstrous survival from aeons we had thought pre-human, I can only wonder that we preserved the semblance of equilibrium which we did. Of course we knew that something—chronology, scientific theory, or our own consciousness—was woefully awry; yet we kept enough poise to guide the plane, observe many things quite minutely, and take a careful series of photographs which may yet serve both us and the world in good stead. In my case, ingrained scientific habit may have helped; for above all my bewilderment and sense of menace there burned a dominant curiosity to fathom more of this age-old secret—to know what sort of beings had built and lived in this incalculably gigantic place, and what relation to the general world of its time or of other times so unique a concentration of life could have had.
     For this place could be no ordinary city. It must have formed the primary nucleus and centre of some archaic and unbelievable chapter of earth's history whose outward ramifications, recalled only dimly in the most obscure and distorted myths, had vanished utterly amidst the chaos of terrene convulsions long before any human race we know had shambled out of apedom. Here sprawled a palaeogean megalopolis compared with which the fabled Atlantis and Lemuria, Commoriom and Uzuldaroum, and Olathoë in the land of Lomar are recent things of today—not even of yesterday; a megalopolis ranking with such whispered pre-human blasphemies as Valusia, R'lyeh, Ib in the land of Mnar, and the Nameless City of Arabia Deserta. As we flew above that tangle of stark titan towers my imagination sometimes escaped all bounds and roved aimlessly in realms of fantastic associations—even weaving links betwixt this lost world and some of my own wildest dreams concerning the mad horror at the camp.
     The plane's fuel-tank, in the interest of greater lightness, had been only partly filled; hence we now had to exert caution in our explorations. Even so, however, we covered an enormous extent of ground—or rather, air—after swooping down to a level where the wind became virtually negligible. There seemed to be no limit to the mountain-range, or to the length of the frightful stone city which bordered its inner foothills. Fifty miles of flight in each direction shewed no major change in the labyrinth of rock and masonry that clawed up corpse-like through the eternal ice. There were, though, some highly absorbing diversifications; such as the carvings on the canyon where that broad river had once pierced the foothills and approached its sinking-place in the great range. The headlands at the stream's entrance had been boldly carved into Cyclopean pylons; and something about the ridgy, barrel-shaped designs stirred up oddly vague, hateful, and confusing semi-remembrances in both Danforth and me.
     We also came upon several star-shaped open spaces, evidently public squares; and noted various undulations in the terrain. Where a sharp hill rose, it was generally hollowed out into some sort of rambling stone edifice; but there were at least two exceptions. Of these latter, one was too badly weathered to disclose what had been on the jutting eminence, while the other still bore a fantastic conical monument carved out of the solid rock and roughly resembling such things as the well-known Snake Tomb in the ancient valley of Petra.
     Flying inland from the mountains, we discovered that the city was not of infinite width, even though its length along the foothills seemed endless. After about thirty miles the grotesque stone buildings began to thin out, and in ten more miles we came to an unbroken waste virtually without signs of sentient artifice. The course of the river beyond the city seemed marked by a broad depressed line; while the land assumed a somewhat greater ruggedness, seeming to slope slightly upward as it receded in the mist-hazed west.
     So far we had made no landing, yet to leave the plateau without an attempt at entering some of the monstrous structures would have been inconceivable. Accordingly we decided to find a smooth place on the foothills near our navigable pass, there grounding the plane and preparing to do some exploration on foot. Though these gradual slopes were partly covered with a scattering of ruins, low flying soon disclosed an ample number of possible landing-places. Selecting that nearest to the pass, since our next flight would be across the great range and back to camp, we succeeded about 1230 P.M. in coming down on a smooth, hard snowfield wholly devoid of obstacles and well adapted to a swift and favourable takeoff later on.
     It did not seem necessary to protect the plane with a snow banking for so brief a time and in so comfortable an absence of high winds at this level; hence we merely saw that the landing skis were safely lodged, and that the vital parts of the mechanism were guarded against the cold. For our foot journey we discarded the heaviest of our flying furs, and took with us a small outfit consisting of pocket compass, hand camera, light provisions, voluminous notebooks and paper, geologist's hammer and chisel, specimen-bags, coil of climbing rope, and powerful electric torches with extra batteries; this equipment having been carried in the plane on the chance that we might be able to effect a landing, take ground pictures, make drawings and topographical sketches, and obtain rock specimens from some bare slope, outcropping, or mountain cave. Fortunately we had a supply of extra paper to tear up, place in a spare specimen-bag, and use on the ancient principle of hare-and-hounds for marking our course in any interior mazes we might be able to penetrate. This had been brought in case we found some cave system with air quiet enough to allow such a rapid and easy method in place of the usual rock-chipping method of trail-blazing.
     Walking cautiously downhill over the crusted snow toward the stupendous stone labyrinth that loomed against the opalescent west, we felt almost as keen a sense of imminent marvels as we had felt on approaching the unfathomed mountain pass four hours previously. True, we had become visually familiar with the incredible secret concealed by the barrier peaks; yet the prospect of actually entering primordial walls reared by conscious beings perhaps millions of years ago—before any known race of men could have existed—was none the less awesome and potentially terrible in its implications of cosmic abnormality. Though the thinness of the air at this prodigious altitude made exertion somewhat more difficult than usual; both Danforth and I found ourselves bearing up very well, and felt equal to almost any task which might fall to our lot. It took only a few steps to bring us to a shapeless ruin worn level with the snow, while ten or fifteen rods farther on there was a huge roofless rampart still complete in its gigantic five-pointed outline and rising to an irregular height of ten or eleven feet. For this latter we headed; and when at last we were able actually to touch its weathered Cyclopean blocks, we felt that we had established an unprecedented and almost blasphemous link with forgotten aeons normally closed to our species.
     This rampart, shaped like a star and perhaps 300 feet from point to point, was built of Jurassic sandstone blocks of irregular size, averaging 6 × 8 feet in surface. There was a row of arched loopholes or windows about four feet wide and five feet high; spaced quite symmetrically along the points of the star and at its inner angles, and with the bottoms about four feet from the glaciated surface. Looking through these, we could see that the masonry was fully five feet thick, that there were no partitions remaining within, and that there were traces of banded carvings or bas-reliefs on the interior walls; facts we had indeed guessed before, when flying low over this rampart and others like it. Though lower parts must have originally existed, all traces of such things were now wholly obscured by the deep layer of ice and snow at this point.
     We crawled through one of the windows and vainly tried to decipher the nearly effaced mural designs, but did not attempt to disturb the glaciated floor. Our orientation flights had indicated that many buildings in the city proper were less ice-choked, and that we might perhaps find wholly clear interiors leading down to the true ground level if we entered those structures still roofed at the top. Before we left the rampart we photographed it carefully, and studied its mortarless Cyclopean masonry with complete bewilderment. We wished that Pabodie were present, for his engineering knowledge might have helped us guess how such titanic blocks could have been handled in that unbelievably remote age when the city and its outskirts were built up.
     The half-mile walk downhill to the actual city, with the upper wind shrieking vainly and savagely through the skyward peaks in the background, was something whose smallest details will always remain engraved on my mind. Only in fantastic nightmares could any human beings but Danforth and me conceive such optical effects. Between us and the churning vapours of the west lay that monstrous tangle of dark stone towers; its outré and incredible forms impressing us afresh at every new angle of vision. It was a mirage in solid stone, and were it not for the photographs I would still doubt that such a thing could be. The general type of masonry was identical with that of the rampart we had examined; but the extravagant shapes which this masonry took in its urban manifestations were past all description.
     Even the pictures illustrate only one or two phases of its infinite bizarrerie, endless variety, preternatural massiveness, and utterly alien exoticism. There were geometrical forms for which an Euclid could scarcely find a name—cones of all degrees of irregularity and truncation; terraces of every sort of provocative disproportion; shafts with odd bulbous enlargements; broken columns in curious groups; and five-pointed or five-ridged arrangements of mad grotesqueness. As we drew nearer we could see beneath certain transparent parts of the ice-sheet, and detect some of the tubular stone bridges that connected the crazily sprinkled structures at various heights. Of orderly streets there seemed to be none, the only broad open swath being a mile to the left, where the ancient river had doubtless flowed through the town into the mountains.
     Our field-glasses shewed the external horizontal bands of nearly effaced sculptures and dot-groups to be very prevalent, and we could half imagine what the city must once have looked like—even though most of the roofs and tower-tops had necessarily perished. As a whole, it had been a complex tangle of twisted lanes and alleys; all of them deep canyons, and some little better than tunnels because of the overhanging masonry or overarching bridges. Now, outspread below us, it loomed like a dream-phantasy against a westward mist through whose northern end the low, reddish antarctic sun of early afternoon was struggling to shine; and when for a moment that sun encountered a denser obstruction and plunged the scene into temporary shadow, the effect was subtly menacing in a way I can never hope to depict. Even the faint howling and piping of the unfelt wind in the great mountain passes behind us took on a wilder note of purposeful malignity. The last stage of our descent to the town was unusually steep and abrupt, and a rock outcropping at the edge where the grade changed led us to think that an artificial terrace had once existed there. Under the glaciation, we believed, there must be a flight of steps or its equivalent.
     When at last we plunged into the labyrinthine town itself, clambering over fallen masonry and shrinking from the oppressive nearness and dwarfing height of omnipresent crumbling and pitted walls, our sensations again became such that I marvel at the amount of self-control we retained. Danforth was frankly jumpy, and began making some offensively irrelevant speculations about the horror at the camp—which I resented all the more because I could not help sharing certain conclusions forced upon us by many features of this morbid survival from nightmare antiquity. The speculations worked on his imagination, too; for in one place—where a debris-littered alley turned a sharp corner—he insisted that he saw faint traces of ground markings which he did not like; whilst elsewhere he stopped to listen to a subtle imaginary sound from some undefined point—a muffled musical piping, he said, not unlike that of the wind in the mountain caves yet somehow disturbingly different. The ceaseless five-pointedness of the surrounding architecture and of the few distinguishable mural arabesques had a dimly sinister suggestiveness we could not escape; and gave us a touch of terrible subconscious certainty concerning the primal entities which had reared and dwelt in this unhallowed place.
     Nevertheless our scientific and adventurous souls were not wholly dead; and we mechanically carried out our programme of chipping specimens from all the different rock types represented in the masonry. We wished a rather full set in order to draw better conclusions regarding the age of the place. Nothing in the great outer walls seemed to date from later than the Jurassic and Comanchian periods, nor was any piece of stone in the entire place of a greater recency than the Pliocene age. In stark certainty, we were wandering amidst a death which had reigned at least 500,000 years, and in all probability even longer.
     As we proceeded through this maze of stone-shadowed twilight we stopped at all available apertures to study interiors and investigate entrance possibilities. Some were above our reach, whilst others led only into ice-choked ruins as unroofed and barren as the rampart on the hill. One, though spacious and inviting, opened on a seemingly bottomless abyss without visible means of descent. Now and then we had a chance to study the petrified wood of a surviving shutter, and were impressed by the fabulous antiquity implied in the still discernible grain. These things had come from Mesozoic gymnosperms and conifers—especially Cretaceous cycads—and from fan-palms and early angiosperms of plainly Tertiary date. Nothing definitely later than the Pliocene could be discovered. In the placing of these shutters—whose edges shewed the former presence of queer and long-vanished hinges—usage seemed to be varied; some being on the outer and some on the inner side of the deep embrasures. They seemed to have become wedged in place, thus surviving the rusting of their former and probably metallic fixtures and fastenings.
     After a time we came across a row of windows—in the bulges of a colossal five-ridged cone of undamaged apex—which led into a vast, well-preserved room with stone flooring; but these were too high in the room to permit of descent without a rope. We had a rope with us, but did not wish to bother with this twenty-foot drop unless obliged to—especially in this thin plateau air where great demands were made upon the heart action. This enormous room was probably a hall or concourse of some sort, and our electric torches shewed bold, distinct, and potentially startling sculptures arranged round the walls in broad, horizontal bands separated by equally broad strips of conventional arabesques. We took careful note of this spot, planning to enter here unless a more easily gained interior were encountered.
     Finally, though, we did encounter exactly the opening we wished; an archway about six feet wide and ten feet high, marking the former end of an aërial bridge which had spanned an alley about five feet above the present level of glaciation. These archways, of course, were flush with upper-story floors; and in this case one of the floors still existed. The building thus accessible was a series of rectangular terraces on our left facing westward. That across the alley, where the other archway yawned, was a decrepit cylinder with no windows and with a curious bulge about ten feet above the aperture. It was totally dark inside, and the archway seemed to open on a well of illimitable emptiness.
     Heaped debris made the entrance to the vast left-hand building doubly easy, yet for a moment we hesitated before taking advantage of the long-wished chance. For though we had penetrated into this tangle of archaic mystery, it required fresh resolution to carry us actually inside a complete and surviving building of a fabulous elder world whose nature was becoming more and more hideously plain to us. In the end, however, we made the plunge; and scrambled up over the rubble into the gaping embrasure. The floor beyond was of great slate slabs, and seemed to form the outlet of a long, high corridor with sculptured walls.
     Observing the many inner archways which led off from it, and realising the probable complexity of the nest of apartments within, we decided that we must begin our system of hare-and-hound trail-blazing. Hitherto our compasses, together with frequent glimpses of the vast mountain-range between the towers in our rear, had been enough to prevent our losing our way; but from now on, the artificial substitute would be necessary. Accordingly we reduced our extra paper to shreds of suitable size, placed these in a bag to be carried by Danforth, and prepared to use them as economically as safety would allow. This method would probably gain us immunity from straying, since there did not appear to be any strong air-currents inside the primordial masonry. If such should develop, or if our paper supply should give out, we could of course fall back on the more secure though more tedious and retarding method of rock-chipping.
     Just how extensive a territory we had opened up, it was impossible to guess without a trial. The close and frequent connexion of the different buildings made it likely that we might cross from one to another on bridges underneath the ice except where impeded by local collapses and geologic rifts, for very little glaciation seemed to have entered the massive constructions. Almost all the areas of transparent ice had revealed the submerged windows as tightly shuttered, as if the town had been left in that uniform state until the glacial sheet came to crystallise the lower part for all succeeding time. Indeed, one gained a curious impression that this place had been deliberately closed and deserted in some dim, bygone aeon, rather than overwhelmed by any sudden calamity or even gradual decay. Had the coming of the ice been foreseen, and had a nameless population left en masse to seek a less doomed abode? The precise physiographic conditions attending the formation of the ice-sheet at this point would have to wait for later solution. It had not, very plainly, been a grinding drive. Perhaps the pressure of accumulated snows had been responsible; and perhaps some flood from the river, or from the bursting of some ancient glacial dam in the great range, had helped to create the special state now observable. Imagination could conceive almost anything in connexion with this place.

VI.

It would be cumbrous to give a detailed, consecutive account of our wanderings inside that cavernous, aeon-dead honeycomb of primal masonry; that monstrous lair of elder secrets which now echoed for the first time, after uncounted epochs, to the tread of human feet. This is especially true because so much of the horrible drama and revelation came from a mere study of the omnipresent mural carvings. Our flashlight photographs of those carvings will do much toward proving the truth of what we are now disclosing, and it is lamentable that we had not a larger film supply with us. As it was, we made crude notebook sketches of certain salient features after all our films were used up.
     The building which we had entered was one of great size and elaborateness, and gave us an impressive notion of the architecture of that nameless geologic past. The inner partitions were less massive than the outer walls, but on the lower levels were excellently preserved. Labyrinthine complexity, involving curiously irregular differences in floor levels, characterised the entire arrangement; and we should certainly have been lost at the very outset but for the trail of torn paper left behind us. We decided to explore the more decrepit upper parts first of all, hence climbed aloft in the maze for a distance of some 100 feet, to where the topmost tier of chambers yawned snowily and ruinously open to the polar sky. Ascent was effected over the steep, transversely ribbed stone ramps or inclined planes which everywhere served in lieu of stairs. The rooms we encountered were of all imaginable shapes and proportions, ranging from five-pointed stars to triangles and perfect cubes. It might be safe to say that their general average was about 30 × 30 feet in floor area, and 20 feet in height; though many larger apartments existed. After thoroughly examining the upper regions and the glacial level we descended story by story into the submerged part, where indeed we soon saw we were in a continuous maze of connected chambers and passages probably leading over unlimited areas outside this particular building. The Cyclopean massiveness and giganticism of everything about us became curiously oppressive; and there was something vaguely but deeply unhuman in all the contours, dimensions, proportions, decorations, and constructional nuances of the blasphemously archaic stonework. We soon realised from what the carvings revealed that this monstrous city was many million years old.
     We cannot yet explain the engineering principles used in the anomalous balancing and adjustment of the vast rock masses, though the function of the arch was clearly much relied on. The rooms we visited were wholly bare of all portable contents, a circumstance which sustained our belief in the city's deliberate desertion. The prime decorative feature was the almost universal system of mural sculpture; which tended to run in continuous horizontal bands three feet wide and arranged from floor to ceiling in alternation with bands of equal width given over to geometrical arabesques. There were exceptions to this rule of arrangement, but its preponderance was overwhelming. Often, however, a series of smooth cartouches containing oddly patterned groups of dots would be sunk along one of the arabesque bands.
     The technique, we soon saw, was mature, accomplished, and aesthetically evolved to the highest degree of civilised mastery; though utterly alien in every detail to any known art tradition of the human race. In delicacy of execution no sculpture I have ever seen could approach it. The minutest details of elaborate vegetation, or of animal life, were rendered with astonishing vividness despite the bold scale of the carvings; whilst the conventional designs were marvels of skilful intricacy. The arabesques displayed a profound use of mathematical principles, and were made up of obscurely symmetrical curves and angles based on the quantity of five. The pictorial bands followed a highly formalised tradition, and involved a peculiar treatment of perspective; but had an artistic force that moved us profoundly notwithstanding the intervening gulf of vast geologic periods. Their method of design hinged on a singular juxtaposition of the cross-section with the two-dimensional silhouette, and embodied an analytical psychology beyond that of any known race of antiquity. It is useless to try to compare this art with any represented in our museums. Those who see our photographs will probably find its closest analogue in certain grotesque conceptions of the most daring futurists.
     The arabesque tracery consisted altogether of depressed lines whose depth on unweathered walls varied from one to two inches. When cartouches with dot-groups appeared—evidently as inscriptions in some unknown and primordial language and alphabet—the depression of the smooth surface was perhaps an inch and a half, and of the dots perhaps a half-inch more. The pictorial bands were in counter-sunk low relief, their background being depressed about two inches from the original wall surface. In some specimens marks of a former colouration could be detected, though for the most part the untold aeons had disintegrated and banished any pigments which may have been applied. The more one studied the marvellous technique the more one admired the things. Beneath their strict conventionalisation one could grasp the minute and accurate observation and graphic skill of the artists; and indeed, the very conventions themselves served to symbolise and accentuate the real essence or vital differentiation of every object delineated. We felt, too, that besides these recognisable excellences there were others lurking beyond the reach of our perceptions. Certain touches here and there gave vague hints of latent symbols and stimuli which another mental and emotional background, and a fuller or different sensory equipment, might have made of profound and poignant significance to us.
     The subject-matter of the sculptures obviously came from the life of the vanished epoch of their creation, and contained a large proportion of evident history. It is this abnormal historic-mindedness of the primal race—a chance circumstance operating, through coincidence, miraculously in our favour—which made the carvings so awesomely informative to us, and which caused us to place their photography and transcription above all other considerations. In certain rooms the dominant arrangement was varied by the presence of maps, astronomical charts, and other scientific designs on an enlarged scale—these things giving a naive and terrible corroboration to what we gathered from the pictorial friezes and dadoes. In hinting at what the whole revealed, I can only hope that my account will not arouse a curiosity greater than sane caution on the part of those who believe me at all. It would be tragic if any were to be allured to that realm of death and horror by the very warning meant to discourage them.
     Interrupting these sculptured walls were high windows and massive twelve-foot doorways; both now and then retaining the petrified wooden planks—elaborately carved and polished—of the actual shutters and doors. All metal fixtures had long ago vanished, but some of the doors remained in place and had to be forced aside as we progressed from room to room. Window-frames with odd transparent panes—mostly elliptical—survived here and there, though in no considerable quantity. There were also frequent niches of great magnitude, generally empty, but once in a while containing some bizarre object carved from green soapstone which was either broken or perhaps held too inferior to warrant removal. Other apertures were undoubtedly connected with bygone mechanical facilities—heating, lighting, and the like—of a sort suggested in many of the carvings. Ceilings tended to be plain, but had sometimes been inlaid with green soapstone or other tiles, mostly fallen now. Floors were also paved with such tiles, though plain stonework predominated.
     As I have said, all furniture and other moveables were absent; but the sculptures gave a clear idea of the strange devices which had once filled these tomb-like, echoing rooms. Above the glacial sheet the floors were generally thick with detritus, litter, and debris; but farther down this condition decreased. In some of the lower chambers and corridors there was little more than gritty dust or ancient incrustations, while occasional areas had an uncanny air of newly swept immaculateness. Of course, where rifts or collapses had occurred, the lower levels were as littered as the upper ones. A central court—as in other structures we had seen from the air—saved the inner regions from total darkness; so that we seldom had to use our electric torches in the upper rooms except when studying sculptured details. Below the ice-cap, however, the twilight deepened; and in many parts of the tangled ground level there was an approach to absolute blackness.
     To form even a rudimentary idea of our thoughts and feelings as we penetrated this aeon-silent maze of unhuman masonry one must correlate a hopelessly bewildering chaos of fugitive moods, memories, and impressions. The sheer appalling antiquity and lethal desolation of the place were enough to overwhelm almost any sensitive person, but added to these elements were the recent unexplained horror at the camp, and the revelations all too soon effected by the terrible mural sculptures around us. The moment we came upon a perfect section of carving, where no ambiguity of interpretation could exist, it took only a brief study to give us the hideous truth—a truth which it would be naive to claim Danforth and I had not independently suspected before, though we had carefully refrained from even hinting it to each other. There could now be no further merciful doubt about the nature of the beings which had built and inhabited this monstrous dead city millions of years ago, when man's ancestors were primitive archaic mammals, and vast dinosaurs roamed the tropical steppes of Europe and Asia.
     We had previously clung to a desperate alternative and insisted—each to himself—that the omnipresence of the five-pointed motif meant only some cultural or religious exaltation of the Archaean natural object which had so patently embodied the quality of five-pointedness; as the decorative motifs of Minoan Crete exalted the sacred bull, those of Egypt the scarabaeus, those of Rome the wolf and the eagle, and those of various savage tribes some chosen totem-animal. But this lone refuge was now stripped from us, and we were forced to face definitely the reason-shaking realisation which the reader of these pages has doubtless long ago anticipated. I can scarcely bear to write it down in black and white even now, but perhaps that will not be necessary. 
     The things once rearing and dwelling in this frightful masonry in the age of dinosaurs were not indeed dinosaurs, but far worse. Mere dinosaurs were new and almost brainless objects—but the builders of the city were wise and old, and had left certain traces in rocks even then laid down well-nigh a thousand million years . . . rocks laid down before the true life of earth had advanced beyond plastic groups of cells . . . rocks laid down before the true life of earth had existed at all. They were the makers and enslavers of that life, and above all doubt the originals of the fiendish elder myths which things like the Pnakotic Manuscripts and the Necronomicon affrightedly hint about. They were the Great Old Ones that had filtered down from the stars when earth was young—the beings whose substance an alien evolution had shaped, and whose powers were such as this planet had never bred. And to think that only the day before Danforth and I had actually looked upon fragments of their millennially fossilised substance . . . and that poor Lake and his party had seen their complete outlines. . . .
     It is of course impossible for me to relate in proper order the stages by which we picked up what we know of that monstrous chapter of pre-human life. After the first shock of the certain revelation we had to pause a while to recuperate, and it was fully three o'clock before we got started on our actual tour of systematic research. The sculptures in the building we entered were of relatively late date—perhaps two million years ago—as checked up by geological, biological, and astronomical features; and embodied an art which would be called decadent in comparison with that of specimens we found in older buildings after crossing bridges under the glacial sheet. One edifice hewn from the solid rock seemed to go back forty or possibly even fifty million years—to the lower Eocene or upper Cretaceous—and contained bas-reliefs of an artistry surpassing anything else, with one tremendous exception, that we encountered. That was, we have since agreed, the oldest domestic structure we traversed.
     Were it not for the support of those flashlights soon to be made public, I would refrain from telling what I found and inferred, lest I be confined as a madman. Of course, the infinitely early parts of the patchwork tale—representing the pre-terrestrial life of the star-headed beings on other planets, and in other galaxies, and in other universes—can readily be interpreted as the fantastic mythology of those beings themselves; yet such parts sometimes involved designs and diagrams so uncannily close to the latest findings of mathematics and astrophysics that I scarcely know what to think. Let others judge when they see the photographs I shall publish.
     Naturally, no one set of carvings which we encountered told more than a fraction of any connected story; nor did we even begin to come upon the various stages of that story in their proper order. Some of the vast rooms were independent units so far as their designs were concerned, whilst in other cases a continuous chronicle would be carried through a series of rooms and corridors. The best of the maps and diagrams were on the walls of a frightful abyss below even the ancient ground level—a cavern perhaps 200 feet square and sixty feet high, which had almost undoubtedly been an educational centre of some sort. There were many provoking repetitions of the same material in different rooms and buildings; since certain chapters of experience, and certain summaries or phases of racial history, had evidently been favourites with different decorators or dwellers. Sometimes, though, variant versions of the same theme proved useful in settling debatable points and filling in gaps.
     I still wonder that we deduced so much in the short time at our disposal. Of course, we even now have only the barest outline; and much of that was obtained later on from a study of the photographs and sketches we made. It may be the effect of this later study—the revived memories and vague impressions acting in conjunction with his general sensitiveness and with that final supposed horror-glimpse whose essence he will not reveal even to me—which has been the immediate source of Danforth's present breakdown. But it had to be; for we could not issue our warning intelligently without the fullest possible information, and the issuance of that warning is a prime necessity. Certain lingering influences in that unknown antarctic world of disordered time and alien natural law make it imperative that further exploration be discouraged.

VII.

The full story, so far as deciphered, will shortly appear in an official bulletin of Miskatonic University. Here I shall sketch only the salient high lights in a formless, rambling way. Myth or otherwise, the sculptures told of the coming of those star-headed things to the nascent, lifeless earth out of cosmic space—their coming, and the coming of many other alien entities such as at certain times embark upon spatial pioneering. They seemed able to traverse the interstellar ether on their vast membraneous wings—thus oddly confirming some curious hill folklore long ago told me by an antiquarian colleague. They had lived under the sea a good deal, building fantastic cities and fighting terrific battles with nameless adversaries by means of intricate devices employing unknown principles of energy. Evidently their scientific and mechanical knowledge far surpassed man's today, though they made use of its more widespread and elaborate forms only when obliged to. Some of the sculptures suggested that they had passed through a stage of mechanised life on other planets, but had receded upon finding its effects emotionally unsatisfying. Their preternatural toughness of organisation and simplicity of natural wants made them peculiarly able to live on a high plane without the more specialised fruits of artificial manufacture, and even without garments except for occasional protection against the elements.
     It was under the sea, at first for food and later for other purposes, that they first created earth-life—using available substances according to long-known methods. The more elaborate experiments came after the annihilation of various cosmic enemies. They had done the same thing on other planets; having manufactured not only necessary foods, but certain multicellular protoplasmic masses capable of moulding their tissues into all sorts of temporary organs under hypnotic influence and thereby forming ideal slaves to perform the heavy work of the community. These viscous masses were without doubt what Abdul Alhazred whispered about as the shoggoths in his frightful Necronomicon, though even that mad Arab had not hinted that any existed on earth except in the dreams of those who had chewed a certain alkaloidal herb. When the star-headed Old Ones on this planet had synthesised their simple food forms and bred a good supply of shoggoths, they allowed other cell-groups to develop into other forms of animal and vegetable life for sundry purposes; extirpating any whose presence became troublesome.
     With the aid of the shoggoths, whose expansions could be made to lift prodigious weights, the small, low cities under the sea grew to vast and imposing labyrinths of stone not unlike those which later rose on land. Indeed, the highly adaptable Old Ones had lived much on land in other parts of the universe, and probably retained many traditions of land construction. As we studied the architecture of all these sculptured palaeogean cities, including that whose aeon-dead corridors we were even then traversing, we were impressed by a curious coincidence which we have not yet tried to explain, even to ourselves. The tops of the buildings, which in the actual city around us had of course been weathered into shapeless ruins ages ago, were clearly displayed in the bas-reliefs; and shewed vast clusters of needle-like spires, delicate finials on certain cone and pyramid apexes, and tiers of thin, horizontal scalloped discs capping cylindrical shafts. This was exactly what we had seen in that monstrous and portentous mirage, cast by a dead city whence such skyline features had been absent for thousands and tens of thousands of years, which loomed on our ignorant eyes across the unfathomed mountains of madness as we first approached poor Lake's ill-fated camp.
     Of the life of the Old Ones, both under the sea and after part of them migrated to land, volumes could be written. Those in shallow water had continued the fullest use of the eyes at the ends of their five main head tentacles, and had practiced the arts of sculpture and of writing in quite the usual way—the writing accomplished with a stylus on waterproof waxen surfaces. Those lower down in the ocean depths, though they used a curious phosphorescent organism to furnish light, pieced out their vision with obscure special senses operating through the prismatic cilia on their heads—senses which rendered all the Old Ones partly independent of light in emergencies. Their forms of sculpture and writing had changed curiously during the descent, embodying certain apparently chemical coating processes—probably to secure phosphorescence—which the bas-reliefs could not make clear to us. The beings moved in the sea partly by swimming—using the lateral crinoid arms—and partly by wriggling with the lower tier of tentacles containing the pseudo-feet. Occasionally they accomplished long swoops with the auxiliary use of two or more sets of their fan-like folding wings. On land they locally used the pseudo-feet, but now and then flew to great heights or over long distances with their wings. The many slender tentacles into which the crinoid arms branched were infinitely delicate, flexible, strong, and accurate in muscular-nervous coördination; ensuring the utmost skill and dexterity in all artistic and other manual operations.
     The toughness of the things was almost incredible. Even the terrific pressures of the deepest sea-bottoms appeared powerless to harm them. Very few seemed to die at all except by violence, and their burial-places were very limited. The fact that they covered their vertically inhumed dead with five-pointed inscribed mounds set up thoughts in Danforth and me which made a fresh pause and recuperation necessary after the sculptures revealed it. The beings multiplied by means of spores—like vegetable pteridophytes as Lake had suspected—but owing to their prodigious toughness and longevity, and consequent lack of replacement needs, they did not encourage the large-scale development of new prothalli except when they had new regions to colonise. The young matured swiftly, and received an education evidently beyond any standard we can imagine. The prevailing intellectual and aesthetic life was highly evolved, and produced a tenaciously enduring set of customs and institutions which I shall describe more fully in my coming monograph. These varied slightly according to sea or land residence, but had the same foundations and essentials.
     Though able, like vegetables, to derive nourishment from inorganic substances; they vastly preferred organic and especially animal food. They ate uncooked marine life under the sea, but cooked their viands on land. They hunted game and raised meat herds—slaughtering with sharp weapons whose odd marks on certain fossil bones our expedition had noted. They resisted all ordinary temperatures marvellously; and in their natural state could live in water down to freezing. When the great chill of the Pleistocene drew on, however—nearly a million years ago—the land dwellers had to resort to special measures including artificial heating; until at last the deadly cold appears to have driven them back into the sea. For their prehistoric flights through cosmic space, legend said, they had absorbed certain chemicals and became almost independent of eating, breathing, or heat conditions; but by the time of the great cold they had lost track of the method. In any case they could not have prolonged the artificial state indefinitely without harm.
     Being non-pairing and semi-vegetable in structure, the Old Ones had no biological basis for the family phase of mammal life; but seemed to organise large households on the principles of comfortable space-utility and—as we deduced from the pictured occupations and diversions of co-dwellers—congenial mental association. In furnishing their homes they kept everything in the centre of the huge rooms, leaving all the wall spaces free for decorative treatment. Lighting, in the case of the land inhabitants, was accomplished by a device probably electro-chemical in nature. Both on land and under water they used curious tables, chairs, and couches like cylindrical frames—for they rested and slept upright with folded-down tentacles—and racks for the hinged sets of dotted surfaces forming their books.
     Government was evidently complex and probably socialistic, though no certainties in this regard could be deduced from the sculptures we saw. There was extensive commerce, both local and between different cities; certain small, flat counters, five-pointed and inscribed, serving as money. Probably the smaller of the various greenish soapstones found by our expedition were pieces of such currency. Though the culture was mainly urban, some agriculture and much stock-raising existed. Mining and a limited amount of manufacturing were also practiced. Travel was very frequent, but permanent migration seemed relatively rare except for the vast colonising movements by which the race expanded. For personal locomotion no external aid was used; since in land, air, and water movement alike the Old Ones seemed to possess excessively vast capacities for speed. Loads, however, were drawn by beasts of burden—shoggoths under the sea, and a curious variety of primitive vertebrates in the later years of land existence.
     These vertebrates, as well as an infinity of other life-forms—animal and vegetable, marine, terrestrial, and aërial—were the products of unguided evolution acting on life-cells made by the Old Ones but escaping beyond their radius of attention. They had been suffered to develop unchecked because they had not come in conflict with the dominant beings. Bothersome forms, of course, were mechanically exterminated. It interested us to see in some of the very last and most decadent sculptures a shambling primitive mammal, used sometimes for food and sometimes as an amusing buffoon by the land dwellers, whose vaguely simian and human foreshadowings were unmistakable. In the building of land cities the huge stone blocks of the high towers were generally lifted by vast-winged pterodactyls of a species heretofore unknown to palaeontology.
     The persistence with which the Old Ones survived various geologic changes and convulsions of the earth's crust was little short of miraculous. Though few or none of their first cities seem to have remained beyond the Archaean age, there was no interruption in their civilisation or in the transmission of their records. Their original place of advent to the planet was the Antarctic Ocean, and it is likely that they came not long after the matter forming the moon was wrenched from the neighbouring South Pacific. According to one of the sculptured maps, the whole globe was then under water, with stone cities scattered farther and farther from the antarctic as aeons passed. Another map shews a vast bulk of dry land around the south pole, where it is evident that some of the beings made experimental settlements though their main centres were transferred to the nearest sea-bottom. Later maps, which display this land mass as cracking and drifting, and sending certain detached parts northward, uphold in a striking way the theories of continental drift lately advanced by Taylor, Wegener, and Joly.
     With the upheaval of new land in the South Pacific tremendous events began. Some of the marine cities were hopelessly shattered, yet that was not the worst misfortune. Another race—a land race of beings shaped like octopi and probably corresponding to the fabulous pre-human spawn of Cthulhu—soon began filtering down from cosmic infinity and precipitated a monstrous war which for a time drove the Old Ones wholly back to the sea—a colossal blow in view of the increasing land settlements. Later peace was made, and the new lands were given to the Cthulhu spawn whilst the Old Ones held the sea and the older lands. New land cities were founded—the greatest of them in the antarctic, for this region of first arrival was sacred. From then on, as before, the antarctic remained the centre of the Old Ones' civilisation, and all the discoverable cities built there by the Cthulhu spawn were blotted out. Then suddenly the lands of the Pacific sank again, taking with them the frightful stone city of R'lyeh and all the cosmic octopi, so that the Old Ones were again supreme on the planet except for one shadowy fear about which they did not like to speak. At a rather later age their cities dotted all the land and water areas of the globe—hence the recommendation in my coming monograph that some archaeologist make systematic borings with Pabodie's type of apparatus in certain widely separated regions.
     The steady trend down the ages was from water to land; a movement encouraged by the rise of new land masses, though the ocean was never wholly deserted. Another cause of the landward movement was the new difficulty in breeding and managing the shoggoths upon which successful sea-life depended. With the march of time, as the sculptures sadly confessed, the art of creating new life from inorganic matter had been lost; so that the Old Ones had to depend on the moulding of forms already in existence. On land the great reptiles proved highly tractable; but the shoggoths of the sea, reproducing by fission and acquiring a dangerous degree of accidental intelligence, presented for a time a formidable problem.
     They had always been controlled through the hypnotic suggestion of the Old Ones, and had modelled their tough plasticity into various useful temporary limbs and organs; but now their self-modelling powers were sometimes exercised independently, and in various imitative forms implanted by past suggestion. They had, it seems, developed a semi-stable brain whose separate and occasionally stubborn volition echoed the will of the Old Ones without always obeying it. Sculptured images of these shoggoths filled Danforth and me with horror and loathing. They were normally shapeless entities composed of a viscous jelly which looked like an agglutination of bubbles; and each averaged about fifteen feet in diameter when a sphere. They had, however, a constantly shifting shape and volume; throwing out temporary developments or forming apparent organs of sight, hearing, and speech in imitation of their masters, either spontaneously or according to suggestion.
     They seem to have become peculiarly intractable toward the middle of the Permian age, perhaps 150 million years ago, when a veritable war of re-subjugation was waged upon them by the marine Old Ones. Pictures of this war, and of the headless, slime-coated fashion in which the shoggoths typically left their slain victims, held a marvellously fearsome quality despite the intervening abyss of untold ages. The Old Ones had used curious weapons of molecular disturbance against the rebel entities, and in the end had achieved a complete victory. Thereafter the sculptures shewed a period in which shoggoths were tamed and broken by armed Old Ones as the wild horses of the American west were tamed by cowboys. Though during the rebellion the shoggoths had shewn an ability to live out of water, this transition was not encouraged; since their usefulness on land would hardly have been commensurate with the trouble of their management.
     During the Jurassic age the Old Ones met fresh adversity in the form of a new invasion from outer space—this time by half-fungous, half-crustacean creatures from a planet identifiable as the remote and recently discovered Pluto; creatures undoubtedly the same as those figuring in certain whispered hill legends of the north, and remembered in the Himalayas as the Mi-Go, or Abominable Snow-Men. To fight these beings the Old Ones attempted, for the first time since their terrene advent, to sally forth again into the planetary ether; but despite all traditional preparations found it no longer possible to leave the earth's atmosphere. Whatever the old secret of interstellar travel had been, it was now definitely lost to the race. In the end the Mi-Go drove the Old Ones out of all the northern lands, though they were powerless to disturb those in the sea. Little by little the slow retreat of the elder race to their original antarctic habitat was beginning.
     It was curious to note from the pictured battles that both the Cthulhu spawn and the Mi-Go seem to have been composed of matter more widely different from that which we know than was the substance of the Old Ones. They were able to undergo transformations and reintegrations impossible for their adversaries, and seem therefore to have originally come from even remoter gulfs of cosmic space. The Old Ones, but for their abnormal toughness and peculiar vital properties, were strictly material, and must have had their absolute origin within the known space-time continuum; whereas the first sources of the other beings can only be guessed at with bated breath. All this, of course, assuming that the non-terrestrial linkages and the anomalies ascribed to the invading foes are not pure mythology. Conceivably, the Old Ones might have invented a cosmic framework to account for their occasional defeats; since historical interest and pride obviously formed their chief psychological element. It is significant that their annals failed to mention many advanced and potent races of beings whose mighty cultures and towering cities figure persistently in certain obscure legends.
     The changing state of the world through long geologic ages appeared with startling vividness in many of the sculptured maps and scenes. In certain cases existing science will require revision, while in other cases its bold deductions are magnificently confirmed. As I have said, the hypothesis of Taylor, Wegener, and Joly that all the continents are fragments of an original antarctic land mass which cracked from centrifugal force and drifted apart over a technically viscous lower surface—an hypothesis suggested by such things as the complementary outlines of Africa and South America, and the way the great mountain chains are rolled and shoved up—receives striking support from this uncanny source.
     Maps evidently shewing the Carboniferous world of an hundred million or more years ago displayed significant rifts and chasms destined later to separate Africa from the once continuous realms of Europe (then the Valusia of hellish primal legend), Asia, the Americas, and the antarctic continent. Other charts—and most significantly one in connexion with the founding fifty million years ago of the vast dead city around us—shewed all the present continents well differentiated. And in the latest discoverable specimen—dating perhaps from the Pliocene age—the approximate world of today appeared quite clearly despite the linkage of Alaska with Siberia, of North America with Europe through Greenland, and of South America with the antarctic continent through Graham Land. In the Carboniferous map the whole globe—ocean floor and rifted land mass alike—bore symbols of the Old Ones' vast stone cities, but in the later charts the gradual recession toward the antarctic became very plain. The final Pliocene specimen shewed no land cities except on the antarctic continent and the tip of South America, nor any ocean cities north of the fiftieth parallel of South Latitude. Knowledge and interest in the northern world, save for a study of coast-lines probably made during long exploration flights on those fan-like membraneous wings, had evidently declined to zero among the Old Ones.
     Destruction of cities through the upthrust of mountains, the centrifugal rending of continents, the seismic convulsions of land or sea-bottom, and other natural causes was a matter of common record; and it was curious to observe how fewer and fewer replacements were made as the ages wore on. The vast dead megalopolis that yawned around us seemed to be the last general centre of the race; built early in the Cretaceous age after a titanic earth-buckling had obliterated a still vaster predecessor not far distant. It appeared that this general region was the most sacred spot of all, where reputedly the first Old Ones had settled on a primal sea-bottom. In the new city—many of whose features we could recognise in the sculptures, but which stretched fully an hundred miles along the mountain-range in each direction beyond the farthest limits of our aërial survey—there were reputed to be preserved certain sacred stones forming part of the first sea-bottom city, which were thrust up to light after long epochs in the course of the general crumpling of strata.

VIII.

Naturally, Danforth and I studied with especial interest and a peculiarly personal sense of awe everything pertaining to the immediate district in which we were. Of this local material there was naturally a vast abundance; and on the tangled ground level of the city we were lucky enough to find a house of very late date whose walls, though somewhat damaged by a neighbouring rift, contained sculptures of decadent workmanship carrying the story of the region much beyond the period of the Pliocene map whence we derived our last general glimpse of the pre-human world. This was the last place we examined in detail, since what we found there gave us a fresh immediate objective.
     Certainly, we were in one of the strangest, weirdest, and most terrible of all the corners of earth's globe. Of all existing lands it was infinitely the most ancient; and the conviction grew upon us that this hideous upland must indeed be the fabled nightmare plateau of Leng which even the mad author of the Necronomicon was reluctant to discuss. The great mountain chain was tremendously long—starting as a low range at Luitpold Land on the coast of Weddell Sea and virtually crossing the entire continent. The really high part stretched in a mighty arc from about Latitude 82°, E. Longitude 60° to Latitude 70°, E. Longitude 115°, with its concave side toward our camp and its seaward end in the region of that long, ice-locked coast whose hills were glimpsed by Wilkes and Mawson at the Antarctic Circle.
     Yet even more monstrous exaggerations of Nature seemed disturbingly close at hand. I have said that these peaks are higher than the Himalayas, but the sculptures forbid me to say that they are earth's highest. That grim honour is beyond doubt reserved for something which half the sculptures hesitated to record at all, whilst others approached it with obvious repugnance and trepidation. It seems that there was one part of the ancient land—the first part that ever rose from the waters after the earth had flung off the moon and the Old Ones had seeped down from the stars—which had come to be shunned as vaguely and namelessly evil. Cities built there had crumbled before their time, and had been found suddenly deserted. Then when the first great earth-buckling had convulsed the region in the Comanchian age, a frightful line of peaks had shot suddenly up amidst the most appalling din and chaos—and earth had received her loftiest and most terrible mountains.
     If the scale of the carvings was correct, these abhorred things must have been much over 40,000 feet high—radically vaster than even the shocking mountains of madness we had crossed. They extended, it appeared, from about Latitude 77°, E. Longitude 70° to Latitude 70°, E. Longitude 100°—less than 300 miles away from the dead city, so that we would have spied their dreaded summits in the dim western distance had it not been for that vague opalescent haze. Their northern end must likewise be visible from the long Antarctic Circle coast-line at Queen Mary Land.
     Some of the Old Ones, in the decadent days, had made strange prayers to those mountains; but none ever went near them or dared to guess what lay beyond. No human eye had ever seen them, and as I studied the emotions conveyed in the carvings I prayed that none ever might. There are protecting hills along the coast beyond them—Queen Mary and Kaiser Wilhelm Lands—and I thank heaven no one has been able to land and climb those hills. I am not as sceptical about old tales and fears as I used to be, and I do not laugh now at the pre-human sculptor's notion that lightning paused meaningfully now and then at each of the brooding crests, and that an unexplained glow shone from one of those terrible pinnacles all through the long polar night. There may be a very real and very monstrous meaning in the old Pnakotic whispers about Kadath in the Cold Waste.
     But the terrain close at hand was hardly less strange, even if less namelessly accursed. Soon after the founding of the city the great mountain-range became the seat of the principal temples, and many carvings shewed what grotesque and fantastic towers had pierced the sky where now we saw only the curiously clinging cubes and ramparts. In the course of ages the caves had appeared, and had been shaped into adjuncts of the temples. With the advance of still later epochs all the limestone veins of the region were hollowed out by ground waters, so that the mountains, the foothills, and the plains below them were a veritable network of connected caverns and galleries. Many graphic sculptures told of explorations deep underground, and of the final discovery of the Stygian sunless sea that lurked at earth's bowels.
     This vast nighted gulf had undoubtedly been worn by the great river which flowed down from the nameless and horrible westward mountains, and which had formerly turned at the base of the Old Ones' range and flowed beside that chain into the Indian Ocean between Budd and Totten Lands on Wilkes's coast-line. Little by little it had eaten away the limestone hill base at its turning, till at last its sapping currents reached the caverns of the ground waters and joined with them in digging a deeper abyss. Finally its whole bulk emptied into the hollow hills and left the old bed toward the ocean dry. Much of the later city as we now found it had been built over that former bed. The Old Ones, understanding what had happened, and exercising their always keen artistic sense, had carved into ornate pylons those headlands of the foothills where the great stream began its descent into eternal darkness.
     This river, once crossed by scores of noble stone bridges, was plainly the one whose extinct course we had seen in our aëroplane survey. Its position in different carvings of the city helped us to orient ourselves to the scene as it had been at various stages of the region's age-long, aeon-dead history; so that we were able to sketch a hasty but careful map of the salient features—squares, important buildings, and the like—for guidance in further explorations. We could soon reconstruct in fancy the whole stupendous thing as it was a million or ten million or fifty million years ago, for the sculptures told us exactly what the buildings and mountains and squares and suburbs and landscape setting and luxuriant Tertiary vegetation had looked like. It must have had a marvellous and mystic beauty, and as I thought of it I almost forgot the clammy sense of sinister oppression with which the city's inhuman age and massiveness and deadness and remoteness and glacial twilight had choked and weighed on my spirit. Yet according to certain carvings the denizens of that city had themselves known the clutch of oppressive terror; for there was a sombre and recurrent type of scene in which the Old Ones were shewn in the act of recoiling affrightedly from some object—never allowed to appear in the design—found in the great river and indicated as having been washed down through waving, vine-draped cycad-forests from those horrible westward mountains.
     It was only in the one late-built house with the decadent carvings that we obtained any foreshadowing of the final calamity leading to the city's desertion. Undoubtedly there must have been many sculptures of the same age elsewhere, even allowing for the slackened energies and aspirations of a stressful and uncertain period; indeed, very certain evidence of the existence of others came to us shortly afterward. But this was the first and only set we directly encountered. We meant to look farther later on; but as I have said, immediate conditions dictated another present objective. There would, though, have been a limit—for after all hope of a long future occupancy of the place had perished among the Old Ones, there could not but have been a complete cessation of mural decoration. The ultimate blow, of course, was the coming of the great cold which once held most of the earth in thrall, and which has never departed from the ill-fated poles—the great cold that, at the world's other extremity, put an end to the fabled lands of Lomar and Hyperborea.
     Just when this tendency began in the antarctic it would be hard to say in terms of exact years. Nowadays we set the beginning of the general glacial periods at a distance of about 500,000 years from the present, but at the poles the terrible scourge must have commenced much earlier. All quantitative estimates are partly guesswork; but it is quite likely that the decadent sculptures were made considerably less than a million years ago, and that the actual desertion of the city was complete long before the conventional opening of the Pleistocene—500,000 years ago—as reckoned in terms of the earth's whole surface.
     In the decadent sculptures there were signs of thinner vegetation everywhere, and of a decreased country life on the part of the Old Ones. Heating devices were shewn in the houses, and winter travellers were represented as muffled in protective fabrics. Then we saw a series of cartouches (the continuous band arrangement being frequently interrupted in these late carvings) depicting a constantly growing migration to the nearest refuges of greater warmth—some fleeing to cities under the sea off the far-away coast, and some clambering down through networks of limestone caverns in the hollow hills to the neighbouring black abyss of subterrene waters.
     In the end it seems to have been the neighbouring abyss which received the greatest colonisation. This was partly due, no doubt, to the traditional sacredness of this especial region; but may have been more conclusively determined by the opportunities it gave for continuing the use of the great temples on the honeycombed mountains, and for retaining the vast land city as a place of summer residence and base of communication with various mines. The linkage of old and new abodes was made more effective by means of several gradings and improvements along the connecting routes, including the chiselling of numerous direct tunnels from the ancient metropolis to the black abyss—sharply down-pointing tunnels whose mouths we carefully drew, according to our most thoughtful estimates, on the guide map we were compiling. It was obvious that at least two of these tunnels lay within a reasonable exploring distance of where we were; both being on the mountainward edge of the city, one less than a quarter-mile toward the ancient river-course, and the other perhaps twice that distance in the opposite direction.
     The abyss, it seems, had shelving shores of dry land at certain places; but the Old Ones built their new city under water—no doubt because of its greater certainty of uniform warmth. The depth of the hidden sea appears to have been very great, so that the earth's internal heat could ensure its habitability for an indefinite period. The beings seem to have had no trouble in adapting themselves to part-time—and eventually, of course, whole-time—residence under water; since they had never allowed their gill systems to atrophy. There were many sculptures which shewed how they had always frequently visited their submarine kinsfolk elsewhere, and how they had habitually bathed on the deep bottom of their great river. The darkness of inner earth could likewise have been no deterrent to a race accustomed to long antarctic nights.
     Decadent though their style undoubtedly was, these latest carvings had a truly epic quality where they told of the building of the new city in the cavern sea. The Old Ones had gone about it scientifically; quarrying insoluble rocks from the heart of the honeycombed mountains, and employing expert workers from the nearest submarine city to perform the construction according to the best methods. These workers brought with them all that was necessary to establish the new venture—shoggoth-tissue from which to breed stone-lifters and subsequent beasts of burden for the cavern city, and other protoplasmic matter to mould into phosphorescent organisms for lighting purposes.
     At last a mighty metropolis rose on the bottom of that Stygian sea; its architecture much like that of the city above, and its workmanship displaying relatively little decadence because of the precise mathematical element inherent in building operations. The newly bred shoggoths grew to enormous size and singular intelligence, and were represented as taking and executing orders with marvellous quickness. They seemed to converse with the Old Ones by mimicking their voices—a sort of musical piping over a wide range, if poor Lake's dissection had indicated aright—and to work more from spoken commands than from hypnotic suggestions as in earlier times. They were, however, kept in admirable control. The phosphorescent organisms supplied light with vast effectiveness, and doubtless atoned for the loss of the familiar polar auroras of the outer-world night.
     Art and decoration were pursued, though of course with a certain decadence. The Old Ones seemed to realise this falling off themselves; and in many cases anticipated the policy of Constantine the Great by transplanting especially fine blocks of ancient carving from their land city, just as the emperor, in a similar age of decline, stripped Greece and Asia of their finest art to give his new Byzantine capital greater splendours than its own people could create. That the transfer of sculptured blocks had not been more extensive, was doubtless owing to the fact that the land city was not at first wholly abandoned. By the time total abandonment did occur—and it surely must have occurred before the polar Pleistocene was far advanced—the Old Ones had perhaps become satisfied with their decadent art—or had ceased to recognise the superior merit of the older carvings. At any rate, the aeon-silent ruins around us had certainly undergone no wholesale sculptural denudation; though all the best separate statues, like other moveables, had been taken away.
     The decadent cartouches and dadoes telling this story were, as I have said, the latest we could find in our limited search. They left us with a picture of the Old Ones shuttling back and forth betwixt the land city in summer and the sea-cavern city in winter, and sometimes trading with the sea-bottom cities off the antarctic coast. By this time the ultimate doom of the land city must have been recognised, for the sculptures shewed many signs of the cold's malign encroachments. Vegetation was declining, and the terrible snows of the winter no longer melted completely even in midsummer. The saurian livestock were nearly all dead, and the mammals were standing it none too well. To keep on with the work of the upper world it had become necessary to adapt some of the amorphous and curiously cold-resistant shoggoths to land life; a thing the Old Ones had formerly been reluctant to do. The great river was now lifeless, and the upper sea had lost most of its denizens except the seals and whales. All the birds had flown away, save only the great, grotesque penguins.
     What had happened afterward we could only guess. How long had the new sea-cavern city survived? Was it still down there, a stony corpse in eternal blackness? Had the subterranean waters frozen at last? To what fate had the ocean-bottom cities of the outer world been delivered? Had any of the Old Ones shifted north ahead of the creeping ice-cap? Existing geology shews no trace of their presence. Had the frightful Mi-Go been still a menace in the outer land world of the north? Could one be sure of what might or might not linger even to this day in the lightless and unplumbed abysses of earth's deepest waters? Those things had seemingly been able to withstand any amount of pressure—and men of the sea have fished up curious objects at times. And has the killer-whale theory really explained the savage and mysterious scars on antarctic seals noticed a generation ago by Borchgrevingk?
     The specimens found by poor Lake did not enter into these guesses, for their geologic setting proved them to have lived at what must have been a very early date in the land city's history. They were, according to their location, certainly not less than thirty million years old; and we reflected that in their day the sea-cavern city, and indeed the cavern itself, had no existence. They would have remembered an older scene, with lush Tertiary vegetation everywhere, a younger land city of flourishing arts around them, and a great river sweeping northward along the base of the mighty mountains toward a far-away tropic ocean.
     And yet we could not help thinking about these specimens—especially about the eight perfect ones that were missing from Lake's hideously ravaged camp. There was something abnormal about that whole business—the strange things we had tried so hard to lay to somebody's madness—those frightful graves—the amount and nature of the missing material—Gedney—the unearthly toughness of those archaic monstrosities, and the queer vital freaks the sculptures now shewed the race to have. . . . Danforth and I had seen a good deal in the last few hours, and were prepared to believe and keep silent about many appalling and incredible secrets of primal Nature.

IX.

I have said that our study of the decadent sculptures brought about a change in our immediate objective. This of course had to do with the chiselled avenues to the black inner world, of whose existence we had not known before, but which we were now eager to find and traverse. From the evident scale of the carvings we deduced that a steeply descending walk of about a mile through either of the neighbouring tunnels would bring us to the brink of the dizzy sunless cliffs above the great abyss; down whose side adequate paths, improved by the Old Ones, led to the rocky shore of the hidden and nighted ocean. To behold this fabulous gulf in stark reality was a lure which seemed impossible of resistance once we knew of the thing—yet we realised we must begin the quest at once if we expected to include it on our present flight.
     It was now 8 P.M., and we had not enough battery replacements to let our torches burn on forever. We had done so much of our studying and copying below the glacial level that our battery supply had had at least five hours of nearly continuous use; and despite the special dry cell formula would obviously be good for only about four more—though by keeping one torch unused, except for especially interesting or difficult places, we might manage to eke out a safe margin beyond that. It would not do to be without a light in these Cyclopean catacombs, hence in order to make the abyss trip we must give up all further mural deciphering. Of course we intended to revisit the place for days and perhaps weeks of intensive study and photography—curiosity having long ago got the better of horror—but just now we must hasten. Our supply of trail-blazing paper was far from unlimited, and we were reluctant to sacrifice spare notebooks or sketching paper to augment it; but we did let one large notebook go. If worst came to worst, we could resort to rock-chipping—and of course it would be possible, even in case of really lost direction, to work up to full daylight by one channel or another if granted sufficient time for plentiful trial and error. So at last we set off eagerly in the indicated direction of the nearest tunnel.
     According to the carvings from which we had made our map, the desired tunnel-mouth could not be much more than a quarter-mile from where we stood; the intervening space shewing solid-looking buildings quite likely to be penetrable still at a sub-glacial level. The opening itself would be in the basement—on the angle nearest the foothills—of a vast five-pointed structure of evidently public and perhaps ceremonial nature, which we tried to identify from our aërial survey of the ruins. No such structure came to our minds as we recalled our flight, hence we concluded that its upper parts had been greatly damaged, or that it had been totally shattered in an ice-rift we had noticed. In the latter case the tunnel would probably turn out to be choked, so that we would have to try the next nearest one—the one less than a mile to the north. The intervening river-course prevented our trying any of the more southerly tunnels on this trip; and indeed, if both of the neighbouring ones were choked it was doubtful whether our batteries would warrant an attempt on the next northerly one—about a mile beyond our second choice.
     As we threaded our dim way through the labyrinth with the aid of map and compass—traversing rooms and corridors in every stage of ruin or preservation, clambering up ramps, crossing upper floors and bridges and clambering down again, encountering choked doorways and piles of debris, hastening now and then along finely preserved and uncannily immaculate stretches, taking false leads and retracing our way (in such cases removing the blind paper trail we had left), and once in a while striking the bottom of an open shaft through which daylight poured or trickled down—we were repeatedly tantalised by the sculptured walls along our route. Many must have told tales of immense historical importance, and only the prospect of later visits reconciled us to the need of passing them by. As it was, we slowed down once in a while and turned on our second torch. If we had had more films we would certainly have paused briefly to photograph certain bas-reliefs, but time-consuming hand copying was clearly out of the question.
     I come now once more to a place where the temptation to hesitate, or to hint rather than state, is very strong. It is necessary, however, to reveal the rest in order to justify my course in discouraging further exploration. We had wormed our way very close to the computed site of the tunnel's mouth—having crossed a second-story bridge to what seemed plainly the tip of a pointed wall, and descended to a ruinous corridor especially rich in decadently elaborate and apparently ritualistic sculptures of late workmanship—when, about 830 P.M., Danforth's keen young nostrils gave us the first hint of something unusual. If we had had a dog with us, I suppose we would have been warned before. At first we could not precisely say what was wrong with the formerly crystal-pure air, but after a few seconds our memories reacted only too definitely. Let me try to state the thing without flinching. There was an odour—and that odour was vaguely, subtly, and unmistakably akin to what had nauseated us upon opening the insane grave of the horror poor Lake had dissected.
     Of course the revelation was not as clearly cut at the time as it sounds now. There were several conceivable explanations, and we did a good deal of indecisive whispering. Most important of all, we did not retreat without further investigation; for having come this far, we were loath to be balked by anything short of certain disaster. Anyway, what we must have suspected was altogether too wild to believe. Such things did not happen in any normal world. It was probably sheer irrational instinct which made us dim our single torch—tempted no longer by the decadent and sinister sculptures that leered menacingly from the oppressive walls—and which softened our progress to a cautious tiptoeing and crawling over the increasingly littered floor and heaps of debris.
     Danforth's eyes as well as nose proved better than mine, for it was likewise he who first noticed the queer aspect of the debris after we had passed many half-choked arches leading to chambers and corridors on the ground level. It did not look quite as it ought after countless thousands of years of desertion, and when we cautiously turned on more light we saw that a kind of swath seemed to have been lately tracked through it. The irregular nature of the litter precluded any definite marks, but in the smoother places there were suggestions of the dragging of heavy objects. Once we thought there was a hint of parallel tracks, as if of runners. This was what made us pause again.
     It was during that pause that we caught—simultaneously this time—the other odour ahead. Paradoxically, it was both a less frightful and a more frightful odour—less frightful intrinsically, but infinitely appalling in this place under the known circumstances . . . unless, of course, Gedney. . . . For the odour was the plain and familiar one of common petrol—every-day gasoline.
     Our motivation after that is something I will leave to psychologists. We knew now that some terrible extension of the camp horrors must have crawled into this nighted burial-place of the aeons, hence could not doubt any longer the existence of nameless conditions—present or at least recent—just ahead. Yet in the end we did let sheer burning curiosity—or anxiety—or auto-hypnotism—or vague thoughts of responsibility toward Gedney—or what not—drive us on. Danforth whispered again of the print he thought he had seen at the alley-turning in the ruins above; and of the faint musical piping—potentially of tremendous significance in the light of Lake's dissection report despite its close resemblance to the cave-mouth echoes of the windy peaks—which he thought he had shortly afterward half heard from unknown depths below. I, in my turn, whispered of how the camp was left—of what had disappeared, and of how the madness of a lone survivor might have conceived the inconceivable—a wild trip across the monstrous mountains and a descent into the unknown primal masonry—
     But we could not convince each other, or even ourselves, of anything definite. We had turned off all light as we stood still, and vaguely noticed that a trace of deeply filtered upper day kept the blackness from being absolute. Having automatically begun to move ahead, we guided ourselves by occasional flashes from our torch. The disturbed debris formed an impression we could not shake off, and the smell of gasoline grew stronger. More and more ruin met our eyes and hampered our feet, until very soon we saw that the forward way was about to cease. We had been all too correct in our pessimistic guess about that rift glimpsed from the air. Our tunnel quest was a blind one, and we were not even going to be able to reach the basement out of which the abyssward aperture opened.
     The torch, flashing over the grotesquely carven walls of the blocked corridor in which we stood, shewed several doorways in various states of obstruction; and from one of them the gasoline odour—quite submerging that other hint of odour—came with especial distinctness. As we looked more steadily, we saw that beyond a doubt there had been a slight and recent clearing away of debris from that particular opening. Whatever the lurking horror might be, we believed the direct avenue toward it was now plainly manifest. I do not think anyone will wonder that we waited an appreciable time before making any further motion.
     And yet, when we did venture inside that black arch, our first impression was one of anticlimax. For amidst the littered expanse of that sculptured crypt—a perfect cube with sides of about twenty feet—there remained no recent object of instantly discernible size; so that we looked instinctively, though in vain, for a farther doorway. In another moment, however, Danforth's sharp vision had descried a place where the floor debris had been disturbed; and we turned on both torches full strength. Though what we saw in that light was actually simple and trifling, I am none the less reluctant to tell of it because of what it implied. It was a rough levelling of the debris, upon which several small objects lay carelessly scattered, and at one corner of which a considerable amount of gasoline must have been spilled lately enough to leave a strong odour even at this extreme super-plateau altitude. In other words, it could not be other than a sort of camp—a camp made by questing beings who like us had been turned back by the unexpectedly choked way to the abyss.
     Let me be plain. The scattered objects were, so far as substance was concerned, all from Lake's camp; and consisted of tin cans as queerly opened as those we had seen at that ravaged place, many spent matches, three illustrated books more or less curiously smudged, an empty ink bottle with its pictorial and instructional carton, a broken fountain pen, some oddly snipped fragments of fur and tent-cloth, a used electric battery with circular of directions, a folder that came with our type of tent heater, and a sprinkling of crumpled papers. It was all bad enough, but when we smoothed out the papers and looked at what was on them we felt we had come to the worst. We had found certain inexplicably blotted papers at the camp which might have prepared us, yet the effect of the sight down there in the pre-human vaults of a nightmare city was almost too much to bear.
     A mad Gedney might have made the groups of dots in imitation of those found on the greenish soapstones, just as the dots on those insane five-pointed grave-mounds might have been made; and he might conceivably have prepared rough, hasty sketches—varying in their accuracy or lack of it—which outlined the neighbouring parts of the city and traced the way from a circularly represented place outside our previous route—a place we identified as a great cylindrical tower in the carvings and as a vast circular gulf glimpsed in our aërial survey—to the present five-pointed structure and the tunnel-mouth therein. He might, I repeat, have prepared such sketches; for those before us were quite obviously compiled as our own had been from late sculptures somewhere in the glacial labyrinth, though not from the ones which we had seen and used. But what this art-blind bungler could never have done was to execute those sketches in a strange and assured technique perhaps superior, despite haste and carelessness, to any of the decadent carvings from which they were taken—the characteristic and unmistakable technique of the Old Ones themselves in the dead city's heyday.
     There are those who will say Danforth and I were utterly mad not to flee for our lives after that; since our conclusions were now—notwithstanding their wildness—completely fixed, and of a nature I need not even mention to those who have read my account as far as this. Perhaps we were mad—for have I not said those horrible peaks were mountains of madness? But I think I can detect something of the same spirit—albeit in a less extreme form—in the men who stalk deadly beasts through African jungles to photograph them or study their habits. Half-paralysed with terror though we were, there was nevertheless fanned within us a blazing flame of awe and curiosity which triumphed in the end.
     Of course we did not mean to face that—or those—which we knew had been there, but we felt that they must be gone by now. They would by this time have found the other neighbouring entrance to the abyss, and have passed within to whatever night-black fragments of the past might await them in the ultimate gulf—the ultimate gulf they had never seen. Or if that entrance, too, was blocked, they would have gone on to the north seeking another. They were, we remembered, partly independent of light.
     Looking back to that moment, I can scarcely recall just what precise form our new emotions took—just what change of immediate objective it was that so sharpened our sense of expectancy. We certainly did not mean to face what we feared—yet I will not deny that we may have had a lurking, unconscious wish to spy certain things from some hidden vantage-point. Probably we had not given up our zeal to glimpse the abyss itself, though there was interposed a new goal in the form of that great circular place shewn on the crumpled sketches we had found. We had at once recognised it as a monstrous cylindrical tower figuring in the very earliest carvings, but appearing only as a prodigious round aperture from above. Something about the impressiveness of its rendering, even in these hasty diagrams, made us think that its sub-glacial levels must still form a feature of peculiar importance. Perhaps it embodied architectural marvels as yet unencountered by us. It was certainly of incredible age according to the sculptures in which it figured—being indeed among the first things built in the city. Its carvings, if preserved, could not but be highly significant. Moreover, it might form a good present link with the upper world—a shorter route than the one we were so carefully blazing, and probably that by which those others had descended.
     At any rate, the thing we did was to study the terrible sketches—which quite perfectly confirmed our own—and start back over the indicated course to the circular place; the course which our nameless predecessors must have traversed twice before us. The other neighbouring gate to the abyss would lie beyond that. I need not speak of our journey—during which we continued to leave an economical trail of paper—for it was precisely the same in kind as that by which we had reached the cul de sac; except that it tended to adhere more closely to the ground level and even descend to basement corridors. Every now and then we could trace certain disturbing marks in the debris or litter under foot; and after we had passed outside the radius of the gasoline scent we were again faintly conscious—spasmodically—of that more hideous and more persistent scent. After the way had branched from our former course we sometimes gave the rays of our single torch a furtive sweep along the walls; noting in almost every case the well-nigh omnipresent sculptures, which indeed seem to have formed a main aesthetic outlet for the Old Ones.
     About 930 P.M., while traversing a vaulted corridor whose increasingly glaciated floor seemed somewhat below the ground level and whose roof grew lower as we advanced, we began to see strong daylight ahead and were able to turn off our torch. It appeared that we were coming to the vast circular place, and that our distance from the upper air could not be very great. The corridor ended in an arch surprisingly low for these megalithic ruins, but we could see much through it even before we emerged. Beyond there stretched a prodigious round space—fully 200 feet in diameter—strown with debris and containing many choked archways corresponding to the one we were about to cross. The walls were—in available spaces—boldly sculptured into a spiral band of heroic proportions; and displayed, despite the destructive weathering caused by the openness of the spot, an artistic splendour far beyond anything we had encountered before. The littered floor was quite heavily glaciated, and we fancied that the true bottom lay at a considerably lower depth.
     But the salient object of the place was the titanic stone ramp which, eluding the archways by a sharp turn outward into the open floor, wound spirally up the stupendous cylindrical wall like an inside counterpart of those once climbing outside the monstrous towers or ziggurats of antique Babylon. Only the rapidity of our flight, and the perspective which confounded the descent with the tower's inner wall, had prevented our noticing this feature from the air, and thus caused us to seek another avenue to the sub-glacial level. Pabodie might have been able to tell what sort of engineering held it in place, but Danforth and I could merely admire and marvel. We could see mighty stone corbels and pillars here and there, but what we saw seemed inadequate to the function performed. The thing was excellently preserved up to the present top of the tower—a highly remarkable circumstance in view of its exposure—and its shelter had done much to protect the bizarre and disturbing cosmic sculptures on the walls.
     As we stepped out into the awesome half-daylight of this monstrous cylinder-bottom—fifty million years old, and without doubt the most primally ancient structure ever to meet our eyes—we saw that the ramp-traversed sides stretched dizzily up to a height of fully sixty feet. This, we recalled from our aërial survey, meant an outside glaciation of some forty feet; since the yawning gulf we had seen from the plane had been at the top of an approximately twenty-foot mound of crumbled masonry, somewhat sheltered for three-fourths of its circumference by the massive curving walls of a line of higher ruins. According to the sculptures the original tower had stood in the centre of an immense circular plaza; and had been perhaps 500 or 600 feet high, with tiers of horizontal discs near the top, and a row of needle-like spires along the upper rim. Most of the masonry had obviously toppled outward rather than inward—a fortunate happening, since otherwise the ramp might have been shattered and the whole interior choked. As it was, the ramp shewed sad battering; whilst the choking was such that all the archways at the bottom seemed to have been recently half-cleared.
     It took us only a moment to conclude that this was indeed the route by which those others had descended, and that this would be the logical route for our own ascent despite the long trail of paper we had left elsewhere. The tower's mouth was no farther from the foothills and our waiting plane than was the great terraced building we had entered, and any further sub-glacial exploration we might make on this trip would lie in this general region. Oddly, we were still thinking about possible later trips—even after all we had seen and guessed. Then as we picked our way cautiously over the debris of the great floor, there came a sight which for the time excluded all other matters.
     It was the neatly huddled array of three sledges in that farther angle of the ramp's lower and outward-projecting course which had hitherto been screened from our view. There they were—the three sledges missing from Lake's camp—shaken by a hard usage which must have included forcible dragging along great reaches of snowless masonry and debris, as well as much hand portage over utterly unnavigable places. They were carefully and intelligently packed and strapped, and contained things memorably familiar enough—the gasoline stove, fuel cans, instrument cases, provision tins, tarpaulins obviously bulging with books, and some bulging with less obvious contents—everything derived from Lake's equipment. After what we had found in that other room, we were in a measure prepared for this encounter. The really great shock came when we stepped over and undid one tarpaulin whose outlines had peculiarly disquieted us. It seems that others as well as Lake had been interested in collecting typical specimens; for there were two here, both stiffly frozen, perfectly preserved, patched with adhesive plaster where some wounds around the neck had occurred, and wrapped with patent care to prevent further damage. They were the bodies of young Gedney and the missing dog.

X.

Many people will probably judge us callous as well as mad for thinking about the northward tunnel and the abyss so soon after our sombre discovery, and I am not prepared to say that we would have immediately revived such thoughts but for a specific circumstance which broke in upon us and set up a whole new train of speculations. We had replaced the tarpaulin over poor Gedney and were standing in a kind of mute bewilderment when the sounds finally reached our consciousness—the first sounds we had heard since descending out of the open where the mountain wind whined faintly from its unearthly heights. Well known and mundane though they were, their presence in this remote world of death was more unexpected and unnerving than any grotesque or fabulous tones could possibly have been—since they gave a fresh upsetting to all our notions of cosmic harmony.
     Had it been some trace of that bizarre musical piping over a wide range which Lake's dissection report had led us to expect in those others—and which, indeed, our overwrought fancies had been reading into every wind-howl we had heard since coming on the camp horror—it would have had a kind of hellish congruity with the aeon-dead region around us. A voice from other epochs belongs in a graveyard of other epochs. As it was, however, the noise shattered all our profoundly seated adjustments—all our tacit acceptance of the inner antarctic as a waste as utterly and irrevocably void of every vestige of normal life as the sterile disc of the moon. What we heard was not the fabulous note of any buried blasphemy of elder earth from whose supernal toughness an age-denied polar sun had evoked a monstrous response. Instead, it was a thing so mockingly normal and so unerringly familiarised by our sea days off Victoria Land and our camp days at McMurdo Sound that we shuddered to think of it here, where such things ought not to be. To be brief—it was simply the raucous squawking of a penguin.
     The muffled sound floated from sub-glacial recesses nearly opposite to the corridor whence we had come—regions manifestly in the direction of that other tunnel to the vast abyss. The presence of a living water-bird in such a direction—in a world whose surface was one of age-long and uniform lifelessness—could lead to only one conclusion; hence our first thought was to verify the objective reality of the sound. It was, indeed, repeated; and seemed at times to come from more than one throat. Seeking its source, we entered an archway from which much debris had been cleared; resuming our trail-blazing—with an added paper-supply taken with curious repugnance from one of the tarpaulin bundles on the sledges—when we left daylight behind.
     As the glaciated floor gave place to a litter of detritus, we plainly discerned some curious dragging tracks; and once Danforth found a distinct print of a sort whose description would be only too superfluous. The course indicated by the penguin cries was precisely what our map and compass prescribed as an approach to the more northerly tunnel-mouth, and we were glad to find that a bridgeless thoroughfare on the ground and basement levels seemed open. The tunnel, according to the chart, ought to start from the basement of a large pyramidal structure which we seemed vaguely to recall from our aërial survey as remarkably well preserved. Along our path the single torch shewed a customary profusion of carvings, but we did not pause to examine any of these.
     Suddenly a bulky white shape loomed up ahead of us, and we flashed on the second torch. It is odd how wholly this new quest had turned our minds from earlier fears of what might lurk near. Those other ones, having left their supplies in the great circular place, must have planned to return after their scouting trip toward or into the abyss; yet we had now discarded all caution concerning them as completely as if they had never existed. This white, waddling thing was fully six feet high, yet we seemed to realise at once that it was not one of those others. They were larger and dark, and according to the sculptures their motion over land surfaces was a swift, assured matter despite the queerness of their sea-born tentacle equipment. But to say that the white thing did not profoundly frighten us would be vain. We were indeed clutched for an instant by a primitive dread almost sharper than the worst of our reasoned fears regarding those others. Then came a flash of anticlimax as the white shape sidled into a lateral archway to our left to join two others of its kind which had summoned it in raucous tones. For it was only a penguin—albeit of a huge, unknown species larger than the greatest of the known king penguins, and monstrous in its combined albinism and virtual eyelessness.
     When we had followed the thing into the archway and turned both our torches on the indifferent and unheeding group of three we saw that they were all eyeless albinos of the same unknown and gigantic species. Their size reminded us of some of the archaic penguins depicted in the Old Ones' sculptures, and it did not take us long to conclude that they were descended from the same stock—undoubtedly surviving through a retreat to some warmer inner region whose perpetual blackness had destroyed their pigmentation and atrophied their eyes to mere useless slits. That their present habitat was the vast abyss we sought, was not for a moment to be doubted; and this evidence of the gulf's continued warmth and habitability filled us with the most curious and subtly perturbing fancies.
     We wondered, too, what had caused these three birds to venture out of their usual domain. The state and silence of the great dead city made it clear that it had at no time been an habitual seasonal rookery, whilst the manifest indifference of the trio to our presence made it seem odd that any passing party of those others should have startled them. Was it possible that those others had taken some aggressive action or tried to increase their meat supply? We doubted whether that pungent odour which the dogs had hated could cause an equal antipathy in these penguins; since their ancestors had obviously lived on excellent terms with the Old Ones—an amicable relationship which must have survived in the abyss below as long as any of the Old Ones remained. Regretting—in a flareup of the old spirit of pure science—that we could not photograph these anomalous creatures, we shortly left them to their squawking and pushed on toward the abyss whose openness was now so positively proved to us, and whose exact direction occasional penguin tracks made clear.
     Not long afterward a steep descent in a long, low, doorless, and peculiarly sculptureless corridor led us to believe that we were approaching the tunnel-mouth at last. We had passed two more penguins, and heard others immediately ahead. Then the corridor ended in a prodigious open space which made us gasp involuntarily—a perfect inverted hemisphere, obviously deep underground; fully an hundred feet in diameter and fifty feet high, with low archways opening around all parts of the circumference but one, and that one yawning cavernously with a black arched aperture which broke the symmetry of the vault to a height of nearly fifteen feet. It was the entrance to the great abyss.
     In this vast hemisphere, whose concave roof was impressively though decadently carved to a likeness of the primordial celestial dome, a few albino penguins waddled—aliens there, but indifferent and unseeing. The black tunnel yawned indefinitely off at a steep descending grade, its aperture adorned with grotesquely chiselled jambs and lintel. From that cryptical mouth we fancied a current of slightly warmer air and perhaps even a suspicion of vapour proceeded; and we wondered what living entities other than penguins the limitless void below, and the contiguous honeycombings of the land and the titan mountains, might conceal. We wondered, too, whether the trace of mountain-top smoke at first suspected by poor Lake, as well as the odd haze we had ourselves perceived around the rampart-crowned peak, might not be caused by the tortuous-channelled rising of some such vapour from the unfathomed regions of earth's core.
     Entering the tunnel, we saw that its outline was—at least at the start—about fifteen feet each way; sides, floor, and arched roof composed of the usual megalithic masonry. The sides were sparsely decorated with cartouches of conventional designs in a late, decadent style; and all the construction and carving were marvellously well preserved. The floor was quite clear, except for a slight detritus bearing outgoing penguin tracks and the inward tracks of those others. The farther one advanced, the warmer it became; so that we were soon unbuttoning our heavy garments. We wondered whether there were any actually igneous manifestations below, and whether the waters of that sunless sea were hot. After a short distance the masonry gave place to solid rock, though the tunnel kept the same proportions and presented the same aspect of carved regularity. Occasionally its varying grade became so steep that grooves were cut in the floor. Several times we noted the mouths of small lateral galleries not recorded in our diagrams; none of them such as to complicate the problem of our return, and all of them welcome as possible refuges in case we met unwelcome entities on their way back from the abyss. The nameless scent of such things was very distinct. Doubtless it was suicidally foolish to venture into that tunnel under the known conditions, but the lure of the unplumbed is stronger in certain persons than most suspect—indeed, it was just such a lure which had brought us to this unearthly polar waste in the first place. We saw several penguins as we passed along, and speculated on the distance we would have to traverse. The carvings had led us to expect a steep downhill walk of about a mile to the abyss, but our previous wanderings had shewn us that matters of scale were not wholly to be depended on.
     After about a quarter of a mile that nameless scent became greatly accentuated, and we kept very careful track of the various lateral openings we passed. There was no visible vapour as at the mouth, but this was doubtless due to the lack of contrasting cooler air. The temperature was rapidly ascending, and we were not surprised to come upon a careless heap of material shudderingly familiar to us. It was composed of furs and tent-cloth taken from Lake's camp, and we did not pause to study the bizarre forms into which the fabrics had been slashed. Slightly beyond this point we noticed a decided increase in the size and number of the side-galleries, and concluded that the densely honeycombed region beneath the higher foothills must now have been reached. The nameless scent was now curiously mixed with another and scarcely less offensive odour—of what nature we could not guess, though we thought of decaying organisms and perhaps unknown subterrene fungi. Then came a startling expansion of the tunnel for which the carvings had not prepared us—a broadening and rising into a lofty, natural-looking elliptical cavern with a level floor; some 75 feet long and 50 broad, and with many immense side-passages leading away into cryptical darkness.
     Though this cavern was natural in appearance, an inspection with both torches suggested that it had been formed by the artificial destruction of several walls between adjacent honeycombings. The walls were rough, and the high vaulted roof was thick with stalactites; but the solid rock floor had been smoothed off, and was free from all debris, detritus, or even dust to a positively abnormal extent. Except for the avenue through which we had come, this was true of the floors of all the great galleries opening off from it; and the singularity of the condition was such as to set us vainly puzzling. The curious new foetor which had supplemented the nameless scent was excessively pungent here; so much so that it destroyed all trace of the other. Something about this whole place, with its polished and almost glistening floor, struck us as more vaguely baffling and horrible than any of the monstrous things we had previously encountered.
     The regularity of the passage immediately ahead, as well as the larger proportion of penguin-droppings there, prevented all confusion as to the right course amidst this plethora of equally great cave-mouths. Nevertheless we resolved to resume our paper trail-blazing if any further complexity should develop; for dust tracks, of course, could no longer be expected. Upon resuming our direct progress we cast a beam of torchlight over the tunnel walls—and stopped short in amazement at the supremely radical change which had come over the carvings in this part of the passage. We realised, of course, the great decadence of the Old Ones' sculpture at the time of the tunnelling; and had indeed noticed the inferior workmanship of the arabesques in the stretches behind us. But now, in this deeper section beyond the cavern, there was a sudden difference wholly transcending explanation—a difference in basic nature as well as in mere quality, and involving so profound and calamitous a degradation of skill that nothing in the hitherto observed rate of decline could have led one to expect it.
     This new and degenerate work was coarse, bold, and wholly lacking in delicacy of detail. It was counter-sunk with exaggerated depth in bands following the same general line as the sparse cartouches of the earlier sections, but the height of the reliefs did not reach the level of the general surface. Danforth had the idea that it was a second carving—a sort of palimpsest formed after the obliteration of a previous design. In nature it was wholly decorative and conventional; and consisted of crude spirals and angles roughly following the quintile mathematical tradition of the Old Ones, yet seeming more like a parody than a perpetuation of that tradition. We could not get it out of our minds that some subtly but profoundly alien element had been added to the aesthetic feeling behind the technique—an alien element, Danforth guessed, that was responsible for the manifestly laborious substitution. It was like, yet disturbingly unlike, what we had come to recognise as the Old Ones' art; and I was persistently reminded of such hybrid things as the ungainly Palmyrene sculptures fashioned in the Roman manner. That others had recently noticed this belt of carving was hinted by the presence of a used torch battery on the floor in front of one of the most characteristic designs.
     Since we could not afford to spend any considerable time in study, we resumed our advance after a cursory look; though frequently casting beams over the walls to see if any further decorative changes developed. Nothing of the sort was perceived, though the carvings were in places rather sparse because of the numerous mouths of smooth-floored lateral tunnels. We saw and heard fewer penguins, but thought we caught a vague suspicion of an infinitely distant chorus of them somewhere deep within the earth. The new and inexplicable odour was abominably strong, and we could detect scarcely a sign of that other nameless scent. Puffs of visible vapour ahead bespoke increasing contrasts in temperature, and the relative nearness of the sunless sea-cliffs of the great abyss. Then, quite unexpectedly, we saw certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead—obstructions which were quite definitely not penguins—and turned on our second torch after making sure that the objects were quite stationary.

XI.

Still another time have I come to a place where it is very difficult to proceed. I ought to be hardened by this stage; but there are some experiences and intimations which scar too deeply to permit of healing, and leave only such an added sensitiveness that memory reinspires all the original horror. We saw, as I have said, certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead; and I may add that our nostrils were assailed almost simultaneously by a very curious intensification of the strange prevailing foetor, now quite plainly mixed with the nameless stench of those others which had gone before us. The light of the second torch left no doubt of what the obstructions were, and we dared approach them only because we could see, even from a distance, that they were quite as past all harming power as had been the six similar specimens unearthed from the monstrous star-mounded graves at poor Lake's camp.
     They were, indeed, as lacking in completeness as most of those we had unearthed—though it grew plain from the thick, dark-green pool gathering around them that their incompleteness was of infinitely greater recency. There seemed to be only four of them, whereas Lake's bulletins would have suggested no less than eight as forming the group which had preceded us. To find them in this state was wholly unexpected, and we wondered what sort of monstrous struggle had occurred down here in the dark.
     Penguins, attacked in a body, retaliate savagely with their beaks; and our ears now made certain the existence of a rookery far beyond. Had those others disturbed such a place and aroused murderous pursuit? The obstructions did not suggest it, for penguin beaks against the tough tissues Lake had dissected could hardly account for the terrible damage our approaching glance was beginning to make out. Besides, the huge blind birds we had seen appeared to be singularly peaceful.
     Had there, then, been a struggle among those others, and were the absent four responsible? If so, where were they? Were they close at hand and likely to form an immediate menace to us? We glanced anxiously at some of the smooth-floored lateral passages as we continued our slow and frankly reluctant approach. Whatever the conflict was, it had clearly been that which had frightened the penguins into their unaccustomed wandering. It must, then, have arisen near that faintly heard rookery in the incalculable gulf beyond, since there were no signs that any birds had normally dwelt here. Perhaps, we reflected, there had been a hideous running fight, with the weaker party seeking to get back to the cached sledges when their pursuers finished them. One could picture the daemoniac fray between namelessly monstrous entities as it surged out of the black abyss with great clouds of frantic penguins squawking and scurrying ahead.
     I say that we approached those sprawling and incomplete obstructions slowly and reluctantly. Would to heaven we had never approached them at all, but had run back at top speed out of that blasphemous tunnel with the greasily smooth floors and the degenerate murals aping and mocking the things they had superseded—run back, before we had seen what we did see, and before our minds were burned with something which will never let us breathe easily again!
     Both of our torches were turned on the prostrate objects, so that we soon realised the dominant factor in their incompleteness. Mauled, compressed, twisted, and ruptured as they were, their chief common injury was total decapitation. From each one the tentacled starfish-head had been removed; and as we drew near we saw that the manner of removal looked more like some hellish tearing or suction than like any ordinary form of cleavage. Their noisome dark-green ichor formed a large, spreading pool; but its stench was half overshadowed by that newer and stranger stench, here more pungent than at any other point along our route. Only when we had come very close to the sprawling obstructions could we trace that second, unexplainable foetor to any immediate source—and the instant we did so Danforth, remembering certain very vivid sculptures of the Old Ones' history in the Permian age 150 million years ago, gave vent to a nerve-tortured cry which echoed hysterically through that vaulted and archaic passage with the evil palimpsest carvings.
     I came only just short of echoing his cry myself; for I had seen those primal sculptures, too, and had shudderingly admired the way the nameless artist had suggested that hideous slime-coating found on certain incomplete and prostrate Old Ones—those whom the frightful shoggoths had characteristically slain and sucked to a ghastly headlessness in the great war of re-subjugation. They were infamous, nightmare sculptures even when telling of age-old, bygone things; for shoggoths and their work ought not to be seen by human beings or portrayed by any beings. The mad author of the Necronomicon had nervously tried to swear that none had been bred on this planet, and that only drugged dreamers had ever conceived them. Formless protoplasm able to mock and reflect all forms and organs and processes—viscous agglutinations of bubbling cells—rubbery fifteen-foot spheroids infinitely plastic and ductile—slaves of suggestion, builders of cities—more and more sullen, more and more intelligent, more and more amphibious, more and more imitative—Great God! What madness made even those blasphemous Old Ones willing to use and to carve such things?
     And now, when Danforth and I saw the freshly glistening and reflectively iridescent black slime which clung thickly to those headless bodies and stank obscenely with that new unknown odour whose cause only a diseased fancy could envisage—clung to those bodies and sparkled less voluminously on a smooth part of the accursedly re-sculptured wall in a series of grouped dots—we understood the quality of cosmic fear to its uttermost depths. It was not fear of those four missing others—for all too well did we suspect they would do no harm again. Poor devils! After all, they were not evil things of their kind. They were the men of another age and another order of being. Nature had played a hellish jest on them—as it will on any others that human madness, callousness, or cruelty may hereafter drag up in that hideously dead or sleeping polar waste—and this was their tragic homecoming.
     They had not been even savages—for what indeed had they done? That awful awakening in the cold of an unknown epoch—perhaps an attack by the furry, frantically barking quadrupeds, and a dazed defence against them and the equally frantic white simians with the queer wrappings and paraphernalia . . . poor Lake, poor Gedney . . . and poor Old Ones! Scientists to the last—what had they done that we would not have done in their place? God, what intelligence and persistence! What a facing of the incredible, just as those carven kinsmen and forbears had faced things only a little less incredible! Radiates, vegetables, monstrosities, star-spawn—whatever they had been, they were men!
     They had crossed the icy peaks on whose templed slopes they had once worshipped and roamed among the tree-ferns. They had found their dead city brooding under its curse, and had read its carven latter days as we had done. They had tried to reach their living fellows in fabled depths of blackness they had never seen—and what had they found? All this flashed in unison through the thoughts of Danforth and me as we looked from those headless, slime-coated shapes to the loathsome palimpsest sculptures and the diabolical dot-groups of fresh slime on the wall beside them—looked and understood what must have triumphed and survived down there in the Cyclopean water-city of that nighted, penguin-fringed abyss, whence even now a sinister curling mist had begun to belch pallidly as if in answer to Danforth's hysterical scream.
     The shock of recognising that monstrous slime and headlessness had frozen us into mute, motionless statues, and it is only through later conversations that we have learned of the complete identity of our thoughts at that moment. It seemed aeons that we stood there, but actually it could not have been more than ten or fifteen seconds. That hateful, pallid mist curled forward as if veritably driven by some remoter advancing bulk—and then came a sound which upset much of what we had just decided, and in so doing broke the spell and enabled us to run like mad past squawking, confused penguins over our former trail back to the city, along ice-sunken megalithic corridors to the great open circle, and up that archaic spiral ramp in a frenzied automatic plunge for the sane outer air and light of day.
     The new sound, as I have intimated, upset much that we had decided; because it was what poor Lake's dissection had led us to attribute to those we had just judged dead. It was, Danforth later told me, precisely what he had caught in infinitely muffled form when at that spot beyond the alley-corner above the glacial level; and it certainly had a shocking resemblance to the wind-pipings we had both heard around the lofty mountain caves. At the risk of seeming puerile I will add another thing, too; if only because of the surprising way Danforth's impression chimed with mine. Of course common reading is what prepared us both to make the interpretation, though Danforth has hinted at queer notions about unsuspected and forbidden sources to which Poe may have had access when writing his Arthur Gordon Pym a century ago. It will be remembered that in that fantastic tale there is a word of unknown but terrible and prodigious significance connected with the antarctic and screamed eternally by the gigantic, spectrally snowy birds of that malign region's core. Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li! That, I may admit, is exactly what we thought we heard conveyed by that sudden sound behind the advancing white mist—that insidious musical piping over a singularly wide range.
     We were in full flight before three notes or syllables had been uttered, though we knew that the swiftness of the Old Ones would enable any scream-roused and pursuing survivor of the slaughter to overtake us in a moment if it really wished to do so. We had a vague hope, however, that non-aggressive conduct and a display of kindred reason might cause such a being to spare us in case of capture; if only from scientific curiosity. After all, if such an one had nothing to fear for itself it would have no motive in harming us. Concealment being futile at this juncture, we used our torch for a running glance behind, and perceived that the mist was thinning. Would we see, at last, a complete and living specimen of those others? Again came that insidious musical piping—Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!
     Then, noting that we were actually gaining on our pursuer, it occurred to us that the entity might be wounded. We could take no chances, however, since it was very obviously approaching in answer to Danforth's scream rather than in flight from any other entity. The timing was too close to admit of doubt. Of the whereabouts of that less conceivable and less mentionable nightmare—that foetid, unglimpsed mountain of slime-spewing protoplasm whose race had conquered the abyss and sent land pioneers to re-carve and squirm through the burrows of the hills—we could form no guess; and it cost us a genuine pang to leave this probably crippled Old One—perhaps a lone survivor—to the peril of recapture and a nameless fate.
     Thank heaven we did not slacken our run. The curling mist had thickened again, and was driving ahead with increased speed; whilst the straying penguins in our rear were squawking and screaming and displaying signs of a panic really surprising in view of their relatively minor confusion when we had passed them. Once more came that sinister, wide-ranged piping—Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li! We had been wrong. The thing was not wounded, but had merely paused on encountering the bodies of its fallen kindred and the hellish slime inscription above them. We could never know what that daemon message was—but those burials at Lake's camp had shewn how much importance the beings attached to their dead. Our recklessly used torch now revealed ahead of us the large open cavern where various ways converged, and we were glad to be leaving those morbid palimpsest sculptures—almost felt even when scarcely seen—behind.
     Another thought which the advent of the cave inspired was the possibility of losing our pursuer at this bewildering focus of large galleries. There were several of the blind albino penguins in the open space, and it seemed clear that their fear of the oncoming entity was extreme to the point of unaccountability. If at that point we dimmed our torch to the very lowest limit of travelling need, keeping it strictly in front of us, the frightened squawking motions of the huge birds in the mist might muffle our footfalls, screen our true course, and somehow set up a false lead. Amidst the churning, spiralling fog the littered and unglistening floor of the main tunnel beyond this point, as differing from the other morbidly polished burrows, could hardly form a highly distinguishing feature; even, so far as we could conjecture, for those indicated special senses which made the Old Ones partly though imperfectly independent of light in emergencies. In fact, we were somewhat apprehensive lest we go astray ourselves in our haste. For we had, of course, decided to keep straight on toward the dead city; since the consequences of loss in those unknown foothill honeycombings would be unthinkable.
     The fact that we survived and emerged is sufficient proof that the thing did take a wrong gallery whilst we providentially hit on the right one. The penguins alone could not have saved us, but in conjunction with the mist they seem to have done so. Only a benign fate kept the curling vapours thick enough at the right moment, for they were constantly shifting and threatening to vanish. Indeed, they did lift for a second just before we emerged from the nauseously re-sculptured tunnel into the cave; so that we actually caught one first and only half-glimpse of the oncoming entity as we cast a final, desperately fearful glance backward before dimming the torch and mixing with the penguins in the hope of dodging pursuit. If the fate which screened us was benign, that which gave us the half-glimpse was infinitely the opposite; for to that flash of semi-vision can be traced a full half of the horror which has ever since haunted us.
     Our exact motive in looking back again was perhaps no more than the immemorial instinct of the pursued to gauge the nature and course of its pursuer; or perhaps it was an automatic attempt to answer a subconscious question raised by one of our senses. In the midst of our flight, with all our faculties centred on the problem of escape, we were in no condition to observe and analyse details; yet even so our latent brain-cells must have wondered at the message brought them by our nostrils. Afterward we realised what it was—that our retreat from the foetid slime-coating on those headless obstructions, and the coincident approach of the pursuing entity, had not brought us the exchange of stenches which logic called for. In the neighbourhood of the prostrate things that new and lately unexplainable foetor had been wholly dominant; but by this time it ought to have largely given place to the nameless stench associated with those others. This it had not done—for instead, the newer and less bearable smell was now virtually undiluted, and growing more and more poisonously insistent each second.
     So we glanced back—simultaneously, it would appear; though no doubt the incipient motion of one prompted the imitation of the other. As we did so we flashed both torches full strength at the momentarily thinned mist; either from sheer primitive anxiety to see all we could, or in a less primitive but equally unconscious effort to dazzle the entity before we dimmed our light and dodged among the penguins of the labyrinth-centre ahead. Unhappy act! Not Orpheus himself, or Lot's wife, paid much more dearly for a backward glance. And again came that shocking, wide-ranged piping—Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!
     I might as well be frank—even if I cannot bear to be quite direct—in stating what we saw; though at the time we felt that it was not to be admitted even to each other. The words reaching the reader can never even suggest the awfulness of the sight itself. It crippled our consciousness so completely that I wonder we had the residual sense to dim our torches as planned, and to strike the right tunnel toward the dead city. Instinct alone must have carried us through—perhaps better than reason could have done; though if that was what saved us, we paid a high price. Of reason we certainly had little enough left. Danforth was totally unstrung, and the first thing I remember of the rest of the journey was hearing him light-headedly chant an hysterical formula in which I alone of mankind could have found anything but insane irrelevance. It reverberated in falsetto echoes among the squawks of the penguins; reverberated through the vaultings ahead, and—thank God—through the now empty vaultings behind. He could not have begun it at once—else we would not have been alive and blindly racing. I shudder to think of what a shade of difference in his nervous reactions might have brought.
     South Station Under—Washington Under—Park Street Under—Kendall—Central—Harvard. . . . The poor fellow was chanting the familiar stations of the Boston-Cambridge tunnel that burrowed through our peaceful native soil thousands of miles away in New England, yet to me the ritual had neither irrelevance nor home-feeling. It had only horror, because I knew unerringly the monstrous, nefandous analogy that had suggested it. We had expected, upon looking back, to see a terrible and incredibly moving entity if the mists were thin enough; but of that entity we had formed a clear idea. What we did see—for the mists were indeed all too malignly thinned—was something altogether different, and immeasurably more hideous and detestable. It was the utter, objective embodiment of the fantastic novelist's ‘thing that should not be'; and its nearest comprehensible analogue is a vast, onrushing subway train as one sees it from a station platform—the great black front looming colossally out of infinite subterraneous distance, constellated with strangely coloured lights and filling the prodigious burrow as a piston fills a cylinder.
     But we were not on a station platform. We were on the track ahead as the nightmare plastic column of foetid black iridescence oozed tightly onward through its fifteen-foot sinus; gathering unholy speed and driving before it a spiral, re-thickening cloud of the pallid abyss-vapour. It was a terrible, indescribable thing vaster than any subway train—a shapeless congeries of protoplasmic bubbles, faintly self-luminous, and with myriads of temporary eyes forming and unforming as pustules of greenish light all over the tunnel-filling front that bore down upon us, crushing the frantic penguins and slithering over the glistening floor that it and its kind had swept so evilly free of all litter. Still came that eldritch, mocking cry—Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li! And at last we remembered that the daemoniac shoggoths—given life, thought, and plastic organ patterns solely by the Old Ones, and having no language save that which the dot-groups expressed—had likewise no voice save the imitated accents of their bygone masters.

XII.

Danforth and I have recollections of emerging into the great sculptured hemisphere and of threading our back trail through the Cyclopean rooms and corridors of the dead city; yet these are purely dream-fragments involving no memory of volition, details, or physical exertion. It was as if we floated in a nebulous world or dimension without time, causation, or orientation. The grey half-daylight of the vast circular space sobered us somewhat; but we did not go near those cached sledges or look again at poor Gedney and the dog. They have a strange and titanic mausoleum, and I hope the end of this planet will find them still undisturbed.
     It was while struggling up the colossal spiral incline that we first felt the terrible fatigue and short breath which our race through the thin plateau air had produced; but not even the fear of collapse could make us pause before reaching the normal outer realm of sun and sky. There was something vaguely appropriate about our departure from those buried epochs; for as we wound our panting way up the sixty-foot cylinder of primal masonry we glimpsed beside us a continuous procession of heroic sculptures in the dead race's early and undecayed technique—a farewell from the Old Ones, written fifty million years ago.
     Finally scrambling out at the top, we found ourselves on a great mound of tumbled blocks; with the curved walls of higher stonework rising westward, and the brooding peaks of the great mountains shewing beyond the more crumbled structures toward the east. The low antarctic sun of midnight peered redly from the southern horizon through rifts in the jagged ruins, and the terrible age and deadness of the nightmare city seemed all the starker by contrast with such relatively known and accustomed things as the features of the polar landscape. The sky above was a churning and opalescent mass of tenuous ice-vapours, and the cold clutched at our vitals. Wearily resting the outfit-bags to which we had instinctively clung throughout our desperate flight, we rebuttoned our heavy garments for the stumbling climb down the mound and the walk through the aeon-old stone maze to the foothills where our aëroplane waited. Of what had set us fleeing from the darkness of earth's secret and archaic gulfs we said nothing at all.
     In less than a quarter of an hour we had found the steep grade to the foothills—the probable ancient terrace—by which we had descended, and could see the dark bulk of our great plane amidst the sparse ruins on the rising slope ahead. Half way uphill toward our goal we paused for a momentary breathing-spell, and turned to look again at the fantastic palaeogean tangle of incredible stone shapes below us—once more outlined mystically against an unknown west. As we did so we saw that the sky beyond had lost its morning haziness; the restless ice-vapours having moved up to the zenith, where their mocking outlines seemed on the point of settling into some bizarre pattern which they feared to make quite definite or conclusive.
     There now lay revealed on the ultimate white horizon behind the grotesque city a dim, elfin line of pinnacled violet whose needle-pointed heights loomed dream-like against the beckoning rose-colour of the western sky. Up toward this shimmering rim sloped the ancient table-land, the depressed course of the bygone river traversing it as an irregular ribbon of shadow. For a second we gasped in admiration of the scene's unearthly cosmic beauty, and then vague horror began to creep into our souls. For this far violet line could be nothing else than the terrible mountains of the forbidden land—highest of earth's peaks and focus of earth's evil; harbourers of nameless horrors and Archaean secrets; shunned and prayed to by those who feared to carve their meaning; untrodden by any living thing of earth, but visited by the sinister lightnings and sending strange beams across the plains in the polar night—beyond doubt the unknown archetype of that dreaded Kadath in the Cold Waste beyond abhorrent Leng, whereof unholy primal legends hint evasively. We were the first human beings ever to see them—and I hope to God we may be the last.
     If the sculptured maps and pictures in that pre-human city had told truly, these cryptic violet mountains could not be much less than 300 miles away; yet none the less sharply did their dim elfin essence jut above that remote and snowy rim, like the serrated edge of a monstrous alien planet about to rise into unaccustomed heavens. Their height, then, must have been tremendous beyond all known comparison—carrying them up into tenuous atmospheric strata peopled by such gaseous wraiths as rash flyers have barely lived to whisper of after unexplainable falls. Looking at them, I thought nervously of certain sculptured hints of what the great bygone river had washed down into the city from their accursed slopes—and wondered how much sense and how much folly had lain in the fears of those Old Ones who carved them so reticently. I recalled how their northerly end must come near the coast at Queen Mary Land, where even at that moment Sir Douglas Mawson's expedition was doubtless working less than a thousand miles away; and hoped that no evil fate would give Sir Douglas and his men a glimpse of what might lie beyond the protecting coastal range. Such thoughts formed a measure of my overwrought condition at the time—and Danforth seemed to be even worse.
     Yet long before we had passed the great star-shaped ruin and reached our plane our fears had become transferred to the lesser but vast enough range whose re-crossing lay ahead of us. From these foothills the black, ruin-crusted slopes reared up starkly and hideously against the east, again reminding us of those strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich; and when we thought of the damnable honeycombs inside them, and of the frightful amorphous entities that might have pushed their foetidly squirming way even to the topmost hollow pinnacles, we could not face without panic the prospect of again sailing by those suggestive skyward cave-mouths where the wind made sounds like an evil musical piping over a wide range. To make matters worse, we saw distinct traces of local mist around several of the summits—as poor Lake must have done when he made that early mistake about volcanism—and thought shiveringly of that kindred mist from which we had just escaped; of that, and of the blasphemous, horror-fostering abyss whence all such vapours came.
     All was well with the plane, and we clumsily hauled on our heavy flying furs. Danforth got the engine started without trouble, and we made a very smooth takeoff over the nightmare city. Below us the primal Cyclopean masonry spread out as it had done when first we saw it—so short, yet infinitely long, a time ago—and we began rising and turning to test the wind for our crossing through the pass. At a very high level there must have been great disturbance, since the ice-dust clouds of the zenith were doing all sorts of fantastic things; but at 24,000 feet, the height we needed for the pass, we found navigation quite practicable. As we drew close to the jutting peaks the wind's strange piping again became manifest, and I could see Danforth's hands trembling at the controls. Rank amateur though I was, I thought at that moment that I might be a better navigator than he in effecting the dangerous crossing between pinnacles; and when I made motions to change seats and take over his duties he did not protest. I tried to keep all my skill and self-possession about me, and stared at the sector of reddish farther sky betwixt the walls of the pass—resolutely refusing to pay attention to the puffs of mountain-top vapour, and wishing that I had wax-stopped ears like Ulysses' men off the Sirens' coast to keep that disturbing wind-piping from my consciousness.
     But Danforth, released from his piloting and keyed up to a dangerous nervous pitch, could not keep quiet. I felt him turning and wriggling about as he looked back at the terrible receding city, ahead at the cave-riddled, cube-barnacled peaks, sidewise at the bleak sea of snowy, rampart-strown foothills, and upward at the seething, grotesquely clouded sky. It was then, just as I was trying to steer safely through the pass, that his mad shrieking brought us so close to disaster by shattering my tight hold on myself and causing me to fumble helplessly with the controls for a moment. A second afterward my resolution triumphed and we made the crossing safely—yet I am afraid that Danforth will never be the same again.
     I have said that Danforth refused to tell me what final horror made him scream out so insanely—a horror which, I feel sadly sure, is mainly responsible for his present breakdown. We had snatches of shouted conversation above the wind's piping and the engine's buzzing as we reached the safe side of the range and swooped slowly down toward the camp, but that had mostly to do with the pledges of secrecy we had made as we prepared to leave the nightmare city. Certain things, we had agreed, were not for people to know and discuss lightly—and I would not speak of them now but for the need of heading off that Starkweather-Moore Expedition, and others, at any cost. It is absolutely necessary, for the peace and safety of mankind, that some of earth's dark, dead corners and unplumbed depths be let alone; lest sleeping abnormalities wake to resurgent life, and blasphemously surviving nightmares squirm and splash out of their black lairs to newer and wider conquests.
     All that Danforth has ever hinted is that the final horror was a mirage. It was not, he declares, anything connected with the cubes and caves of echoing, vaporous, wormily honeycombed mountains of madness which we crossed; but a single fantastic, daemoniac glimpse, among the churning zenith-clouds, of what lay back of those other violet westward mountains which the Old Ones had shunned and feared. It is very probable that the thing was a sheer delusion born of the previous stresses we had passed through, and of the actual though unrecognised mirage of the dead transmontane city experienced near Lake's camp the day before; but it was so real to Danforth that he suffers from it still.
     He has on rare occasions whispered disjointed and irresponsible things about the black pit, the carven rim, the proto-shoggoths, the windowless solids with five dimensions, the nameless cylinder, the elder pharos, Yog-Sothoth, the primal white jelly, the colour out of space, the wings, the eyes in darkness, the moon-ladder, the original, the eternal, the undying, and other bizarre conceptions; but when he is fully himself he repudiates all this and attributes it to his curious and macabre reading of earlier years. Danforth, indeed, is known to be among the few who have ever dared go completely through that worm-riddled copy of the Necronomicon kept under lock and key in the college library.
     The higher sky, as we crossed the range, was surely vaporous and disturbed enough; and although I did not see the zenith I can well imagine that its swirls of ice-dust may have taken strange forms. Imagination, knowing how vividly distant scenes can sometimes be reflected, refracted, and magnified by such layers of restless cloud, might easily have supplied the rest—and of course Danforth did not hint any of those specific horrors till after his memory had had a chance to draw on his bygone reading. He could never have seen so much in one instantaneous glance.
     At the time his shrieks were confined to the repetition of a single mad word of all too obvious source
     Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!
     
There was no hand to hold me back
That night I found the ancient track
Over the hill, and strained to see
The fields that teased my memory.
This tree, that wall—I knew them well,
And all the roofs and orchards fell
Familiarly upon my mind
As from a past not far behind.
I knew what shadows would be cast
When the late moon came up at last
From back of Zaman's Hill, and how
The vale would shine three hours from now.
And when the path grew steep and high,
And seemed to end against the sky,
I had no fear of what might rest
Beyond that silhouetted crest.
Straight on I walked, while all the night
Grew pale with phosphorescent light,
And wall and farmhouse gable glowed
Unearthly by the climbing road.
There was the milestone that I knew—
Two miles to Dunwich—now the view
Of distant spire and roofs would dawn
With ten more upward paces gone. . . .

There was no hand to hold me back
That night I found the ancient track,
And reached the crest to see outspread
A valley of the lost and dead
And over Zaman's Hill the horn
Of a malignant moon was born,
To light the weeds and vines that grew
On ruined walls I never knew.
The fox-fire glowed in field and bog,
And unknown waters spewed a fog
Whose curling talons mocked the thought
That I had ever known this spot.
Too well I saw from the mad scene
That my loved past had never been—
Nor was I now upon the trail
Descending to that long-dead vale.
Around was fog—ahead, the spray
Of star-streams in the Milky Way. . . .
There was no hand to hold me back
That night I found the ancient track.

Beseech you, sir, be merry; you have cause,
So have we all, of joy; for our escape
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
Is common; every day some sailor's wife,
The masters of some merchant and the merchant
Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
I mean our preservation, few in millions
Can speak like us then wisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with our comfort.
ALONSO
Prithee, peace.
SEBASTIAN
He receives comfort like cold porridge.
ANTONIO
The visitor will not give him o'er so.
SEBASTIAN
Look he's winding up the watch of his wit;
by and by it will strike.
GONZALO
Sir,--
SEBASTIAN
One tell.
GONZALO
When every grief is entertain'd that's offer'd,
Comes to the entertainer--
SEBASTIAN
A dollar.
GONZALO
Dolour comes to him, indeed you
have spoken truer than you purposed.
SEBASTIAN
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.
GONZALO
Therefore, my lord,--
ANTONIO
Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
ALONSO
I prithee, spare.
GONZALO
Well, I have done but yet,--
SEBASTIAN
He will be talking.
ANTONIO
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good
wager, first begins to crow?
SEBASTIAN
The old cock.
ANTONIO
The cockerel.
SEBASTIAN
Done. The wager?
ANTONIO
A laughter.
SEBASTIAN
A match!
ADRIAN
Though this island seem to be desert,--
SEBASTIAN
Ha, ha, ha! So, you're paid.
ADRIAN
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible,--
SEBASTIAN
Yet,--
ADRIAN
Yet,--
ANTONIO
He could not miss't.
ADRIAN
It must needs be of subtle, tender and delicate
temperance.
ANTONIO
Temperance was a delicate wench.
SEBASTIAN
Ay, and a subtle; as he most learnedly delivered.
ADRIAN
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
SEBASTIAN
As if it had lungs and rotten ones.
ANTONIO
Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.
GONZALO
Here is everything advantageous to life.
ANTONIO
True; save means to live.
SEBASTIAN
Of that there's none, or little.
GONZALO
How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!
ANTONIO
The ground indeed is tawny.
SEBASTIAN
With an eye of green in't.
ANTONIO
He misses not much.
SEBASTIAN
No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.
GONZALO
But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost
beyond credit,--
SEBASTIAN
As many vouched rarities are.
GONZALO
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in
the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and
glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with
salt water.
ANTONIO
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not
say he lies?
SEBASTIAN
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report
GONZALO
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we
put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of
the king's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
SEBASTIAN
'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.
ADRIAN
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to
their queen.
GONZALO
Not since widow Dido's time.
ANTONIO
Widow! a pox o' that! How came that widow in?
widow Dido!
SEBASTIAN
What if he had said 'widower AEneas' too? Good Lord,
how you take it!
ADRIAN
'Widow Dido' said you? you make me study of that
she was of Carthage, not of Tunis.
GONZALO
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.
ADRIAN
Carthage?
GONZALO
I assure you, Carthage.
SEBASTIAN
His word is more than the miraculous harp; he hath
raised the wall and houses too.
ANTONIO
What impossible matter will he make easy next?
SEBASTIAN
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket
and give it his son for an apple.
ANTONIO
And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
forth more islands.
GONZALO
Ay.
ANTONIO
Why, in good time.
GONZALO
Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now
as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage
of your daughter, who is now queen.
ANTONIO
And the rarest that e'er came there.
SEBASTIAN
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.
ANTONIO
O, widow Dido! ay, widow Dido.
GONZALO
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
wore it? I mean, in a sort.
ANTONIO
That sort was well fished for.
GONZALO
When I wore it at your daughter's marriage?
ALONSO
You cram these words into mine ears against
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Married my daughter there! for, coming thence,
My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed
I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?
FRANCISCO
Sir, he may live
I saw him beat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swoln that met him; his bold head
'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To the shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bow'd,
As stooping to relieve him I not doubt
He came alive to land.
ALONSO
No, no, he's gone.
SEBASTIAN
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather lose her to an African;
Where she at least is banish'd from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on't.
ALONSO
Prithee, peace.
SEBASTIAN
You were kneel'd to and importuned otherwise
By all of us, and the fair soul herself
Weigh'd between loathness and obedience, at
Which end o' the beam should bow. We have lost your
son,
I fear, for ever Milan and Naples have
More widows in them of this business' making
Than we bring men to comfort them
The fault's your own.
ALONSO
So is the dear'st o' the loss.
GONZALO
My lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
And time to speak it in you rub the sore,
When you should bring the plaster.
SEBASTIAN
Very well.
ANTONIO
And most chirurgeonly.
GONZALO
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
When you are cloudy.
SEBASTIAN
Foul weather?
ANTONIO
Very foul.
GONZALO
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord,--
ANTONIO
He'ld sow't with nettle-seed.
SEBASTIAN
Or docks, or mallows.
GONZALO
And were the king on't, what would I do?
SEBASTIAN
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.
GONZALO
I' the commonwealth I would by contraries
Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none; contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
No occupation; all men idle, all;
And women too, but innocent and pure;
No sovereignty;--
SEBASTIAN
Yet he would be king on't.
ANTONIO
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
beginning.
GONZALO
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
Of its own kind, all foison, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people.
SEBASTIAN
No marrying 'mong his subjects?
ANTONIO
None, man; all idle whores and knaves.
GONZALO
I would with such perfection govern, sir,
To excel the golden age.
SEBASTIAN
God save his majesty!
ANTONIO
Long live Gonzalo!
GONZALO
And,--do you mark me, sir?
ALONSO
Prithee, no more thou dost talk nothing to me.
GONZALO
I do well believe your highness; and
did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen,
who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that
they always use to laugh at nothing.
ANTONIO
'Twas you we laughed at.
GONZALO
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing
to you so you may continue and laugh at
nothing still.
ANTONIO
What a blow was there given!
SEBASTIAN
An it had not fallen flat-long.
GONZALO
You are gentlemen of brave metal; you would lift
the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
in it five weeks without changing.
Enter ARIEL, invisible, playing solemn music

SEBASTIAN
We would so, and then go a bat-fowling.
ANTONIO
Nay, good my lord, be not angry.
GONZALO
No, I warrant you; I will not adventure
my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh
me asleep, for I am very heavy?
ANTONIO
Go sleep, and hear us.
All sleep except ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO

ALONSO
What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts I find
They are inclined to do so.
SEBASTIAN
Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it
It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
It is a comforter.
ANTONIO
We two, my lord,
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.
ALONSO
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.
ALONSO sleeps. Exit ARIEL

SEBASTIAN
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!
ANTONIO
It is the quality o' the climate.
SEBASTIAN
Why
Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not
Myself disposed to sleep.
ANTONIO
Nor I; my spirits are nimble.
They fell together all, as by consent;
They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke. What might,
Worthy Sebastian? O, what might?--No more--
And yet me thinks I see it in thy face,
What thou shouldst be the occasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.
SEBASTIAN
What, art thou waking?
ANTONIO
Do you not hear me speak?
SEBASTIAN
I do; and surely
It is a sleepy language and thou speak'st
Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open; standing, speaking, moving,
And yet so fast asleep.
ANTONIO
Noble Sebastian,
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep--die, rather; wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.
SEBASTIAN
Thou dost snore distinctly;
There's meaning in thy snores.
ANTONIO
I am more serious than my custom you
Must be so too, if heed me; which to do
Trebles thee o'er.
SEBASTIAN
Well, I am standing water.
ANTONIO
I'll teach you how to flow.
SEBASTIAN
Do so to ebb
Hereditary sloth instructs me.
ANTONIO
O,
If you but knew how you the purpose cherish
Whiles thus you mock it! how, in stripping it,
You more invest it! Ebbing men, indeed,
Most often do so near the bottom run
By their own fear or sloth.
SEBASTIAN
Prithee, say on
The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim
A matter from thee, and a birth indeed
Which throes thee much to yield.
ANTONIO
Thus, sir
Although this lord of weak remembrance, this,
Who shall be of as little memory
When he is earth'd, hath here almost persuade,--
For he's a spirit of persuasion, only
Professes to persuade,--the king his son's alive,
'Tis as impossible that he's undrown'd
And he that sleeps here swims.
SEBASTIAN
I have no hope
That he's undrown'd.
ANTONIO
O, out of that 'no hope'
What great hope have you! no hope that way is
Another way so high a hope that even
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,
But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
That Ferdinand is drown'd?
SEBASTIAN
He's gone.
ANTONIO
Then, tell me,
Who's the next heir of Naples?
SEBASTIAN
Claribel.
ANTONIO
She that is queen of Tunis; she that dwells
Ten leagues beyond man's life; she that from Naples
Can have no note, unless the sun were post--
The man i' the moon's too slow--till new-born chins
Be rough and razorable; she that--from whom?
We all were sea-swallow'd, though some cast again,
And by that destiny to perform an act
Whereof what's past is prologue, what to come
In yours and my discharge.
SEBASTIAN
What stuff is this! how say you?
'Tis true, my brother's daughter's queen of Tunis;
So is she heir of Naples; 'twixt which regions
There is some space.
ANTONIO
A space whose every cubit
Seems to cry out, 'How shall that Claribel
Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis,
And let Sebastian wake.' Say, this were death
That now hath seized them; why, they were no worse
Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples
As well as he that sleeps; lords that can prate
As amply and unnecessarily
As this Gonzalo; I myself could make
A chough of as deep chat. O, that you bore
The mind that I do! what a sleep were this
For your advancement! Do you understand me?
SEBASTIAN
Methinks I do.
ANTONIO
And how does your content
Tender your own good fortune?
SEBASTIAN
I remember
You did supplant your brother Prospero.
ANTONIO
True
And look how well my garments sit upon me;
Much feater than before my brother's servants
Were then my fellows; now they are my men.
SEBASTIAN
But, for your conscience?
ANTONIO
Ay, sir; where lies that? if 'twere a kibe,
'Twould put me to my slipper but I feel not
This deity in my bosom twenty consciences,
That stand 'twixt me and Milan, candied be they
And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
No better than the earth he lies upon,
If he were that which now he's like, that's dead;
Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it,
Can lay to bed for ever; whiles you, doing thus,
To the perpetual wink for aye might put
This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who
Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest,
They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk;
They'll tell the clock to any business that
We say befits the hour.
SEBASTIAN
Thy case, dear friend,
Shall be my precedent; as thou got'st Milan,
I'll come by Naples. Draw thy sword one stroke
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest;
And I the king shall love thee.
ANTONIO
Draw together;
And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
To fall it on Gonzalo.
SEBASTIAN
O, but one word.
They talk apart

Re-enter ARIEL, invisible

ARIEL
My master through his art foresees the danger
That you, his friend, are in; and sends me forth--
For else his project dies--to keep them living.
Sings in GONZALO's ear

While you here do snoring lie,
Open-eyed conspiracy
His time doth take.
If of life you keep a care,
Shake off slumber, and beware
Awake, awake!
ANTONIO
Then let us both be sudden.
GONZALO
Now, good angels
Preserve the king.
They wake

ALONSO
Why, how now? ho, awake! Why are you drawn?
Wherefore this ghastly looking?
GONZALO
What's the matter?
SEBASTIAN
Whiles we stood here securing your repose,
Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
Like bulls, or rather lions did't not wake you?
It struck mine ear most terribly.
ALONSO
I heard nothing.
ANTONIO
O, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear,
To make an earthquake! sure, it was the roar
Of a whole herd of lions.
ALONSO
Heard you this, Gonzalo?
GONZALO
Upon mine honour, sir, I heard a humming,
And that a strange one too, which did awake me
I shaked you, sir, and cried as mine eyes open'd,
I saw their weapons drawn there was a noise,
That's verily. 'Tis best we stand upon our guard,
Or that we quit this place; let's draw our weapons.
ALONSO
Lead off this ground; and let's make further search
For my poor son.
GONZALO
Heavens keep him from these beasts!
For he is, sure, i' the island.
ALONSO
Lead away.
ARIEL
Prospero my lord shall know what I have done
So, king, go safely on to seek thy son.

FERDINAND
There be some sports are painful, and their labour
Delight in them sets off some kinds of baseness
Are nobly undergone and most poor matters
Point to rich ends. This my mean task
Would be as heavy to me as odious, but
The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead
And makes my labours pleasures O, she is
Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed,
And he's composed of harshness. I must remove
Some thousands of these logs and pile them up,
Upon a sore injunction my sweet mistress
Weeps when she sees me work, and says, such baseness
Had never like executor. I forget
But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours,
Most busy lest, when I do it.
Enter MIRANDA; and PROSPERO at a distance, unseen

MIRANDA
Alas, now, pray you,
Work not so hard I would the lightning had
Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin'd to pile!
Pray, set it down and rest you when this burns,
'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father
Is hard at study; pray now, rest yourself;
He's safe for these three hours.
FERDINAND
O most dear mistress,
The sun will set before I shall discharge
What I must strive to do.
MIRANDA
If you'll sit down,
I'll bear your logs the while pray, give me that;
I'll carry it to the pile.
FERDINAND
No, precious creature;
I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
Than you should such dishonour undergo,
While I sit lazy by.
MIRANDA
It would become me
As well as it does you and I should do it
With much more ease; for my good will is to it,
And yours it is against.
PROSPERO
Poor worm, thou art infected!
This visitation shows it.
MIRANDA
You look wearily.
FERDINAND
No, noble mistress;'tis fresh morning with me
When you are by at night. I do beseech you--
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers--
What is your name?
MIRANDA
Miranda.--O my father,
I have broke your hest to say so!
FERDINAND
Admired Miranda!
Indeed the top of admiration! worth
What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
I have eyed with best regard and many a time
The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear for several virtues
Have I liked several women; never any
With so fun soul, but some defect in her
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed
And put it to the foil but you, O you,
So perfect and so peerless, are created
Of every creature's best!
MIRANDA
I do not know
One of my sex; no woman's face remember,
Save, from my glass, mine own; nor have I seen
More that I may call men than you, good friend,
And my dear father how features are abroad,
I am skilless of; but, by my modesty,
The jewel in my dower, I would not wish
Any companion in the world but you,
Nor can imagination form a shape,
Besides yourself, to like of. But I prattle
Something too wildly and my father's precepts
I therein do forget.
FERDINAND
I am in my condition
A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king;
I would, not so!--and would no more endure
This wooden slavery than to suffer
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak
The very instant that I saw you, did
My heart fly to your service; there resides,
To make me slave to it; and for your sake
Am I this patient log--man.
MIRANDA
Do you love me?
FERDINAND
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound
And crown what I profess with kind event
If I speak true! if hollowly, invert
What best is boded me to mischief! I
Beyond all limit of what else i' the world
Do love, prize, honour you.
MIRANDA
I am a fool
To weep at what I am glad of.
PROSPERO
Fair encounter
Of two most rare affections! Heavens rain grace
On that which breeds between 'em!
FERDINAND
Wherefore weep you?
MIRANDA
At mine unworthiness that dare not offer
What I desire to give, and much less take
What I shall die to want. But this is trifling;
And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning!
And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!
I am your wife, if you will marry me;
If not, I'll die your maid to be your fellow
You may deny me; but I'll be your servant,
Whether you will or no.
FERDINAND
My mistress, dearest;
And I thus humble ever.
MIRANDA
My husband, then?
FERDINAND
Ay, with a heart as willing
As bondage e'er of freedom here's my hand.
MIRANDA
And mine, with my heart in't; and now farewell
Till half an hour hence.
FERDINAND
A thousand thousand!
Exeunt FERDINAND and MIRANDA severally

PROSPERO
So glad of this as they I cannot be,
Who are surprised withal; but my rejoicing
At nothing can be more. I'll to my book,
For yet ere supper-time must I perform
Much business appertaining.
Exit

Of Herbert West, who was my friend in college and in after life, I can speak only with extreme terror. This terror is not due altogether to the sinister manner of his recent disappearance, but was engendered by the whole nature of his life-work, and first gained its acute form more than seventeen years ago, when we were in the third year of our course at the Miskatonic University Medical School in Arkham. While he was with me, the wonder and diabolism of his experiments fascinated me utterly, and I was his closest companion. Now that he is gone and the spell is broken, the actual fear is greater. Memories and possibilities are ever more hideous than realities.
     The first horrible incident of our acquaintance was the greatest shock I ever experienced, and it is only with reluctance that I repeat it. As I have said, it happened when we were in the medical school, where West had already made himself notorious through his wild theories on the nature of death and the possibility of overcoming it artificially. His views, which were widely ridiculed by the faculty and his fellow-students, hinged on the essentially mechanistic nature of life; and concerned means for operating the organic machinery of mankind by calculated chemical action after the failure of natural processes. In his experiments with various animating solutions he had killed and treated immense numbers of rabbits, guinea-pigs, cats, dogs, and monkeys, till he had become the prime nuisance of the college. Several times he had actually obtained signs of life in animals supposedly dead; in many cases violent signs; but he soon saw that the perfection of this process, if indeed possible, would necessarily involve a lifetime of research. It likewise became clear that, since the same solution never worked alike on different organic species, he would require human subjects for further and more specialised progress. It was here that he first came into conflict with the college authorities, and was debarred from future experiments by no less a dignitary than the dean of the medical school himself—the learned and benevolent Dr. Allan Halsey, whose work in behalf of the stricken is recalled by every old resident of Arkham.
     I had always been exceptionally tolerant of West's pursuits, and we frequently discussed his theories, whose ramifications and corollaries were almost infinite. Holding with Haeckel that all life is a chemical and physical process, and that the so-called soul is a myth, my friend believed that artificial reanimation of the dead can depend only on the condition of the tissues; and that unless actual decomposition has set in, a corpse fully equipped with organs may with suitable measures be set going again in the peculiar fashion known as life. That the psychic or intellectual life might be impaired by the slight deterioration of sensitive brain-cells which even a short period of death would be apt to cause, West fully realised. It had at first been his hope to find a reagent which would restore vitality before the actual advent of death, and only repeated failures on animals had shewn him that the natural and artificial life-motions were incompatible. He then sought extreme freshness in his specimens, injecting his solutions into the blood immediately after the extinction of life. It was this circumstance which made the professors so carelessly sceptical, for they felt that true death had not occurred in any case. They did not stop to view the matter closely and reasoningly.
     It was not long after the faculty had interdicted his work that West confided to me his resolution to get fresh human bodies in some manner, and continue in secret the experiments he could no longer perform openly. To hear him discussing ways and means was rather ghastly, for at the college we had never procured anatomical specimens ourselves. West was then a small, slender, spectacled youth with delicate features, yellow hair, pale blue eyes, and a soft voice, and it was uncanny to hear him dwelling on the relative merits of Christchurch Cemetery and the potter's field. We finally decided on the potter's field, because practically every body in Christchurch was embalmed; a thing of course ruinous to West's researches.
     I was by this time his active and enthralled assistant, and helped him make all his decisions, not only concerning the source of bodies but concerning a suitable place for our loathsome work. It was I who thought of the deserted Chapman farmhouse beyond Meadow Hill, where we fitted up on the ground floor an operating room and a laboratory, each with dark curtains to conceal our midnight doings. The place was far from any road, and in sight of no other house, yet precautions were none the less necessary; since rumours of strange lights, started by chance nocturnal roamers, would soon bring disaster on our enterprise. It was agreed to call the whole thing a chemical laboratory if discovery should occur. Gradually we equipped our sinister haunt of science with materials either purchased in Boston or quietly borrowed from the college—materials carefully made unrecognisable save to expert eyes—and provided spades and picks for the many burials we should have to make in the cellar. At the college we used an incinerator, but the apparatus was too costly for our unauthorised laboratory. Bodies were always a nuisance—even the small guinea-pig bodies from the slight clandestine experiments in West's room at the boarding-house.
     We followed the local death-notices like ghouls, for our specimens demanded particular qualities. What we wanted were corpses interred soon after death and without artificial preservation; preferably free from malforming disease, and certainly with all organs present. Accident victims were our best hope. Not for many weeks did we hear of anything suitable; though we talked with morgue and hospital authorities, ostensibly in the college's interest, as often as we could without exciting suspicion. We found that the college had first choice in every case, so that it might be necessary to remain in Arkham during the summer, when only the limited summer-school classes were held. In the end, though, luck favoured us; for one day we heard of an almost ideal case in the potter's field; a brawny young workman drowned only the morning before in Sumner's Pond, and buried at the town's expense without delay or embalming. That afternoon we found the new grave, and determined to begin work soon after midnight.
     It was a repulsive task that we undertook in the black small hours, even though we lacked at that time the special horror of graveyards which later experiences brought to us. We carried spades and oil dark lanterns, for although electric torches were then manufactured, they were not as satisfactory as the tungsten contrivances of today. The process of unearthing was slow and sordid—it might have been gruesomely poetical if we had been artists instead of scientists—and we were glad when our spades struck wood. When the pine box was fully uncovered West scrambled down and removed the lid, dragging out and propping up the contents. I reached down and hauled the contents out of the grave, and then both toiled hard to restore the spot to its former appearance. The affair made us rather nervous, especially the stiff form and vacant face of our first trophy, but we managed to remove all traces of our visit. When we had patted down the last shovelful of earth we put the specimen in a canvas sack and set out for the old Chapman place beyond Meadow Hill.
     On an improvised dissecting-table in the old farmhouse, by the light of a powerful acetylene lamp, the specimen was not very spectral looking. It had been a sturdy and apparently unimaginative youth of wholesome plebeian type—large-framed, grey-eyed, and brown-haired—a sound animal without psychological subtleties, and probably having vital processes of the simplest and healthiest sort. Now, with the eyes closed, it looked more asleep than dead; though the expert test of my friend soon left no doubt on that score. We had at last what West had always longed for—a real dead man of the ideal kind, ready for the solution as prepared according to the most careful calculations and theories for human use. The tension on our part became very great. We knew that there was scarcely a chance for anything like complete success, and could not avoid hideous fears at possible grotesque results of partial animation. Especially were we apprehensive concerning the mind and impulses of the creature, since in the space following death some of the more delicate cerebral cells might well have suffered deterioration. I, myself, still held some curious notions about the traditional soul of man, and felt an awe at the secrets that might be told by one returning from the dead. I wondered what sights this placid youth might have seen in inaccessible spheres, and what he could relate if fully restored to life. But my wonder was not overwhelming, since for the most part I shared the materialism of my friend. He was calmer than I as he forced a large quantity of his fluid into a vein of the body's arm, immediately binding the incision securely.
     The waiting was gruesome, but West never faltered. Every now and then he applied his stethoscope to the specimen, and bore the negative results philosophically. After about three-quarters of an hour without the least sign of life he disappointedly pronounced the solution inadequate, but determined to make the most of his opportunity and try one change in the formula before disposing of his ghastly prize. We had that afternoon dug a grave in the cellar, and would have to fill it by dawn—for although we had fixed a lock on the house we wished to shun even the remotest risk of a ghoulish discovery. Besides, the body would not be even approximately fresh the next night. So taking the solitary acetylene lamp into the adjacent laboratory, we left our silent guest on the slab in the dark, and bent every energy to the mixing of a new solution; the weighing and measuring supervised by West with an almost fanatical care.
     The awful event was very sudden, and wholly unexpected. I was pouring something from one test-tube to another, and West was busy over the alcohol blast-lamp which had to answer for a Bunsen burner in this gasless edifice, when from the pitch-black room we had left there burst the most appalling and daemoniac succession of cries that either of us had ever heard. Not more unutterable could have been the chaos of hellish sound if the pit itself had opened to release the agony of the damned, for in one inconceivable cacophony was centred all the supernal terror and unnatural despair of animate nature. Human it could not have been—it is not in man to make such sounds—and without a thought of our late employment or its possible discovery both West and I leaped to the nearest window like stricken animals; overturning tubes, lamp, and retorts, and vaulting madly into the starred abyss of the rural night. I think we screamed ourselves as we stumbled frantically toward the town, though as we reached the outskirts we put on a semblance of restraint—just enough to seem like belated revellers staggering home from a debauch.
     We did not separate, but managed to get to West's room, where we whispered with the gas up until dawn. By then we had calmed ourselves a little with rational theories and plans for investigation, so that we could sleep through the day—classes being disregarded. But that evening two items in the paper, wholly unrelated, made it again impossible for us to sleep. The old deserted Chapman house had inexplicably burned to an amorphous heap of ashes; that we could understand because of the upset lamp. Also, an attempt had been made to disturb a new grave in the potter's field, as if by futile and spadeless clawing at the earth. That we could not understand, for we had patted down the mould very carefully.
     And for seventeen years after that West would look frequently over his shoulder, and complain of fancied footsteps behind him. Now he has disappeared.

II. The Plague-Daemon

I shall never forget that hideous summer sixteen years ago, when like a noxious afrite from the halls of Eblis typhoid stalked leeringly through Arkham. It is by that satanic scourge that most recall the year, for truly terror brooded with bat-wings over the piles of coffins in the tombs of Christchurch Cemetery; yet for me there is a greater horror in that time—a horror known to me alone now that Herbert West has disappeared.
     West and I were doing post-graduate work in summer classes at the medical school of Miskatonic University, and my friend had attained a wide notoriety because of his experiments leading toward the revivification of the dead. After the scientific slaughter of uncounted small animals the freakish work had ostensibly stopped by order of our sceptical dean, Dr. Allan Halsey; though West had continued to perform certain secret tests in his dingy boarding-house room, and had on one terrible and unforgettable occasion taken a human body from its grave in the potter's field to a deserted farmhouse beyond Meadow Hill.
     I was with him on that odious occasion, and saw him inject into the still veins the elixir which he thought would to some extent restore life's chemical and physical processes. It had ended horribly—in a delirium of fear which we gradually came to attribute to our own overwrought nerves—and West had never afterward been able to shake off a maddening sensation of being haunted and hunted. The body had not been quite fresh enough; it is obvious that to restore normal mental attributes a body must be very fresh indeed; and a burning of the old house had prevented us from burying the thing. It would have been better if we could have known it was underground.
     After that experience West had dropped his researches for some time; but as the zeal of the born scientist slowly returned, he again became importunate with the college faculty, pleading for the use of the dissecting-room and of fresh human specimens for the work he regarded as so overwhelmingly important. His pleas, however, were wholly in vain; for the decision of Dr. Halsey was inflexible, and the other professors all endorsed the verdict of their leader. In the radical theory of reanimation they saw nothing but the immature vagaries of a youthful enthusiast whose slight form, yellow hair, spectacled blue eyes, and soft voice gave no hint of the supernormal—almost diabolical—power of the cold brain within. I can see him now as he was then—and I shiver. He grew sterner of face, but never elderly. And now Sefton Asylum has had the mishap and West has vanished.
     West clashed disagreeably with Dr. Halsey near the end of our last undergraduate term in a wordy dispute that did less credit to him than to the kindly dean in point of courtesy. He felt that he was needlessly and irrationally retarded in a supremely great work; a work which he could of course conduct to suit himself in later years, but which he wished to begin while still possessed of the exceptional facilities of the university. That the tradition-bound elders should ignore his singular results on animals, and persist in their denial of the possibility of reanimation, was inexpressibly disgusting and almost incomprehensible to a youth of West's logical temperament. Only greater maturity could help him understand the chronic mental limitations of the professor-doctor type—the product of generations of pathetic Puritanism; kindly, conscientious, and sometimes gentle and amiable, yet always narrow, intolerant, custom-ridden, and lacking in perspective. Age has more charity for these incomplete yet high-souled characters, whose worst real vice is timidity, and who are ultimately punished by general ridicule for their intellectual sins—sins like Ptolemaism, Calvinism, anti-Darwinism, anti-Nietzscheism, and every sort of Sabbatarianism and sumptuary legislation. West, young despite his marvellous scientific acquirements, had scant patience with good Dr. Halsey and his erudite colleagues; and nursed an increasing resentment, coupled with a desire to prove his theories to these obtuse worthies in some striking and dramatic fashion. Like most youths, he indulged in elaborate day-dreams of revenge, triumph, and final magnanimous forgiveness.
     And then had come the scourge, grinning and lethal, from the nightmare caverns of Tartarus. West and I had graduated about the time of its beginning, but had remained for additional work at the summer school, so that we were in Arkham when it broke with full daemoniac fury upon the town. Though not as yet licenced physicians, we now had our degrees, and were pressed frantically into public service as the numbers of the stricken grew. The situation was almost past management, and deaths ensued too frequently for the local undertakers fully to handle. Burials without embalming were made in rapid succession, and even the Christchurch Cemetery receiving tomb was crammed with coffins of the unembalmed dead. This circumstance was not without effect on West, who thought often of the irony of the situation—so many fresh specimens, yet none for his persecuted researches! We were frightfully overworked, and the terrific mental and nervous strain made my friend brood morbidly.
     But West's gentle enemies were no less harassed with prostrating duties. College had all but closed, and every doctor of the medical faculty was helping to fight the typhoid plague. Dr. Halsey in particular had distinguished himself in sacrificing service, applying his extreme skill with whole-hearted energy to cases which many others shunned because of danger or apparent hopelessness. Before a month was over the fearless dean had become a popular hero, though he seemed unconscious of his fame as he struggled to keep from collapsing with physical fatigue and nervous exhaustion. West could not withhold admiration for the fortitude of his foe, but because of this was even more determined to prove to him the truth of his amazing doctrines. Taking advantage of the disorganisation of both college work and municipal health regulations, he managed to get a recently deceased body smuggled into the university dissecting-room one night, and in my presence injected a new modification of his solution. The thing actually opened its eyes, but only stared at the ceiling with a look of soul-petrifying horror before collapsing into an inertness from which nothing could rouse it. West said it was not fresh enough—the hot summer air does not favour corpses. That time we were almost caught before we incinerated the thing, and West doubted the advisability of repeating his daring misuse of the college laboratory.
     The peak of the epidemic was reached in August. West and I were almost dead, and Dr. Halsey did die on the 14th. The students all attended the hasty funeral on the 15th, and bought an impressive wreath, though the latter was quite overshadowed by the tributes sent by wealthy Arkham citizens and by the municipality itself. It was almost a public affair, for the dean had surely been a public benefactor. After the entombment we were all somewhat depressed, and spent the afternoon at the bar of the Commercial House; where West, though shaken by the death of his chief opponent, chilled the rest of us with references to his notorious theories. Most of the students went home, or to various duties, as the evening advanced; but West persuaded me to aid him in making a night of it. West's landlady saw us arrive at his room about two in the morning, with a third man between us; and told her husband that we had all evidently dined and wined rather well.
     Apparently this acidulous matron was right; for about 3 a.m. the whole house was aroused by cries coming from West's room, where when they broke down the door they found the two of us unconscious on the blood-stained carpet, beaten, scratched, and mauled, and with the broken remnants of West's bottles and instruments around us. Only an open window told what had become of our assailant, and many wondered how he himself had fared after the terrific leap from the second story to the lawn which he must have made. There were some strange garments in the room, but West upon regaining consciousness said they did not belong to the stranger, but were specimens collected for bacteriological analysis in the course of investigations on the transmission of germ diseases. He ordered them burnt as soon as possible in the capacious fireplace. To the police we both declared ignorance of our late companion's identity. He was, West nervously said, a congenial stranger whom we had met at some downtown bar of uncertain location. We had all been rather jovial, and West and I did not wish to have our pugnacious companion hunted down.
     That same night saw the beginning of the second Arkham horror—the horror that to me eclipsed the plague itself. Christchurch Cemetery was the scene of a terrible killing; a watchman having been clawed to death in a manner not only too hideous for description, but raising a doubt as to the human agency of the deed. The victim had been seen alive considerably after midnight—the dawn revealed the unutterable thing. The manager of a circus at the neighbouring town of Bolton was questioned, but he swore that no beast had at any time escaped from its cage. Those who found the body noted a trail of blood leading to the receiving tomb, where a small pool of red lay on the concrete just outside the gate. A fainter trail led away toward the woods, but it soon gave out.
     The next night devils danced on the roofs of Arkham, and unnatural madness howled in the wind. Through the fevered town had crept a curse which some said was greater than the plague, and which some whispered was the embodied daemon-soul of the plague itself. Eight houses were entered by a nameless thing which strewed red death in its wake—in all, seventeen maimed and shapeless remnants of bodies were left behind by the voiceless, sadistic monster that crept abroad. A few persons had half seen it in the dark, and said it was white and like a malformed ape or anthropomorphic fiend. It had not left behind quite all that it had attacked, for sometimes it had been hungry. The number it had killed was fourteen; three of the bodies had been in stricken homes and had not been alive.
     On the third night frantic bands of searchers, led by the police, captured it in a house on Crane Street near the Miskatonic campus. They had organised the quest with care, keeping in touch by means of volunteer telephone stations, and when someone in the college district had reported hearing a scratching at a shuttered window, the net was quickly spread. On account of the general alarm and precautions, there were only two more victims, and the capture was effected without major casualties. The thing was finally stopped by a bullet, though not a fatal one, and was rushed to the local hospital amidst universal excitement and loathing.
     For it had been a man. This much was clear despite the nauseous eyes, the voiceless simianism, and the daemoniac savagery. They dressed its wound and carted it to the asylum at Sefton, where it beat its head against the walls of a padded cell for sixteen years—until the recent mishap, when it escaped under circumstances that few like to mention. What had most disgusted the searchers of Arkham was the thing they noticed when the monster's face was cleaned—the mocking, unbelievable resemblance to a learned and self-sacrificing martyr who had been entombed but three days before—the late Dr. Allan Halsey, public benefactor and dean of the medical school of Miskatonic University.
     To the vanished Herbert West and to me the disgust and horror were supreme. I shudder tonight as I think of it; shudder even more than I did that morning when West muttered through his bandages,
     Damn it, it wasn't quite fresh enough!

III. Six Shots by Midnight

It is uncommon to fire all six shots of a revolver with great suddenness when one would probably be sufficient, but many things in the life of Herbert West were uncommon. It is, for instance, not often that a young physician leaving college is obliged to conceal the principles which guide his selection of a home and office, yet that was the case with Herbert West. When he and I obtained our degrees at the medical school of Miskatonic University, and sought to relieve our poverty by setting up as general practitioners, we took great care not to say that we chose our house because it was fairly well isolated, and as near as possible to the potter's field.
     Reticence such as this is seldom without a cause, nor indeed was ours; for our requirements were those resulting from a life-work distinctly unpopular. Outwardly we were doctors only, but beneath the surface were aims of far greater and more terrible moment—for the essence of Herbert West's existence was a quest amid black and forbidden realms of the unknown, in which he hoped to uncover the secret of life and restore to perpetual animation the graveyard's cold clay. Such a quest demands strange materials, among them fresh human bodies; and in order to keep supplied with these indispensable things one must live quietly and not far from a place of informal interment.
     West and I had met in college, and I had been the only one to sympathise with his hideous experiments. Gradually I had come to be his inseparable assistant, and now that we were out of college we had to keep together. It was not easy to find a good opening for two doctors in company, but finally the influence of the university secured us a practice in Bolton—a factory town near Arkham, the seat of the college. The Bolton Worsted Mills are the largest in the Miskatonic Valley, and their polyglot employees are never popular as patients with the local physicians. We chose our house with the greatest care, seizing at last on a rather run-down cottage near the end of Pond Street; five numbers from the closest neighbour, and separated from the local potter's field by only a stretch of meadow land, bisected by a narrow neck of the rather dense forest which lies to the north. The distance was greater than we wished, but we could get no nearer house without going on the other side of the field, wholly out of the factory district. We were not much displeased, however, since there were no people between us and our sinister source of supplies. The walk was a trifle long, but we could haul our silent specimens undisturbed.
     Our practice was surprisingly large from the very first—large enough to please most young doctors, and large enough to prove a bore and a burden to students whose real interest lay elsewhere. The mill-hands were of somewhat turbulent inclinations; and besides their many natural needs, their frequent clashes and stabbing affrays gave us plenty to do. But what actually absorbed our minds was the secret laboratory we had fitted up in the cellar—the laboratory with the long table under the electric lights, where in the small hours of the morning we often injected West's various solutions into the veins of the things we dragged from the potter's field. West was experimenting madly to find something which would start man's vital motions anew after they had been stopped by the thing we call death, but had encountered the most ghastly obstacles. The solution had to be differently compounded for different types—what would serve for guinea-pigs would not serve for human beings, and different human specimens required large modifications.
     The bodies had to be exceedingly fresh, or the slight decomposition of brain tissue would render perfect reanimation impossible. Indeed, the greatest problem was to get them fresh enough—West had had horrible experiences during his secret college researches with corpses of doubtful vintage. The results of partial or imperfect animation were much more hideous than were the total failures, and we both held fearsome recollections of such things. Ever since our first daemoniac session in the deserted farmhouse on Meadow Hill in Arkham, we had felt a brooding menace; and West, though a calm, blond, blue-eyed scientific automaton in most respects, often confessed to a shuddering sensation of stealthy pursuit. He half felt that he was followed—a psychological delusion of shaken nerves, enhanced by the undeniably disturbing fact that at least one of our reanimated specimens was still alive—a frightful carnivorous thing in a padded cell at Sefton. Then there was another—our first—whose exact fate we had never learned.
     We had fair luck with specimens in Bolton—much better than in Arkham. We had not been settled a week before we got an accident victim on the very night of burial, and made it open its eyes with an amazingly rational expression before the solution failed. It had lost an arm—if it had been a perfect body we might have succeeded better. Between then and the next January we secured three more; one total failure, one case of marked muscular motion, and one rather shivery thing—it rose of itself and uttered a sound. Then came a period when luck was poor; interments fell off, and those that did occur were of specimens either too diseased or too maimed for use. We kept track of all the deaths and their circumstances with systematic care.
     One March night, however, we unexpectedly obtained a specimen which did not come from the potter's field. In Bolton the prevailing spirit of Puritanism had outlawed the sport of boxing—with the usual result. Surreptitious and ill-conducted bouts among the mill-workers were common, and occasionally professional talent of low grade was imported. This late winter night there had been such a match; evidently with disastrous results, since two timorous Poles had come to us with incoherently whispered entreaties to attend to a very secret and desperate case. We followed them to an abandoned barn, where the remnants of a crowd of frightened foreigners were watching a silent black form on the floor.
     The match had been between Kid O'Brien—a lubberly and now quaking youth with a most un-Hibernian hooked nose—and Buck Robinson, The Harlem Smoke. He was a loathsome, gorilla-like thing, with abnormally long arms which I could not help calling fore legs, and a face that conjured up thoughts of unspeakable Congo secrets and tom-tom poundings under an eerie moon. The body must have looked even worse in life—but the world holds many ugly things. Fear was upon the whole pitiful crowd, for they did not know what the law would exact of them if the affair were not hushed up; and they were grateful when West, in spite of my involuntary shudders, offered to get rid of the thing quietly—for a purpose I knew too well.
     There was bright moonlight over the snowless landscape, but we dressed the thing and carried it home between us through the deserted streets and meadows, as we had carried a similar thing one horrible night in Arkham. We approached the house from the field in the rear, took the specimen in the back door and down the cellar stairs, and prepared it for the usual experiment. Our fear of the police was absurdly great, though we had timed our trip to avoid the solitary patrolman of that section.
     The result was wearily anticlimactic. Ghastly as our prize appeared, it was wholly unresponsive to every solution we injected in its black arm; solutions prepared from experience with white specimens only. So as the hour grew dangerously near to dawn, we did as we had done with the others—dragged the thing across the meadows to the neck of the woods near the potter's field, and buried it there in the best sort of grave the frozen ground would furnish. The grave was not very deep, but fully as good as that of the previous specimen—the thing which had risen of itself and uttered a sound. In the light of our dark lanterns we carefully covered it with leaves and dead vines, fairly certain that the police would never find it in a forest so dim and dense.
     The next day I was increasingly apprehensive about the police, for a patient brought rumours of a suspected fight and death. West had still another source of worry, for he had been called in the afternoon to a case which ended very threateningly. An Italian woman had become hysterical over her missing child—a lad of five who had strayed off early in the morning and failed to appear for dinner—and had developed symptoms highly alarming in view of an always weak heart. It was a very foolish hysteria, for the boy had often run away before; but Italian peasants are exceedingly superstitious, and this woman seemed as much harassed by omens as by facts. About seven o'clock in the evening she had died, and her frantic husband had made a frightful scene in his efforts to kill West, whom he wildly blamed for not saving her life. Friends had held him when he drew a stiletto, but West departed amidst his inhuman shrieks, curses, and oaths of vengeance. In his latest affliction the fellow seemed to have forgotten his child, who was still missing as the night advanced. There was some talk of searching the woods, but most of the family's friends were busy with the dead woman and the screaming man. Altogether, the nervous strain upon West must have been tremendous. Thoughts of the police and of the mad Italian both weighed heavily.
     We retired about eleven, but I did not sleep well. Bolton had a surprisingly good police force for so small a town, and I could not help fearing the mess which would ensue if the affair of the night before were ever tracked down. It might mean the end of all our local work—and perhaps prison for both West and me. I did not like those rumours of a fight which were floating about. After the clock had struck three the moon shone in my eyes, but I turned over without rising to pull down the shade. Then came the steady rattling at the back door.
     I lay still and somewhat dazed, but before long heard West's rap on my door. He was clad in dressing-gown and slippers, and had in his hands a revolver and an electric flashlight. From the revolver I knew that he was thinking more of the crazed Italian than of the police.
     We'd better both go, he whispered. It wouldn't do not to answer it anyway, and it may be a patient—it would be like one of those fools to try the back door.
     So we both went down the stairs on tiptoe, with a fear partly justified and partly that which comes only from the soul of the weird small hours. The rattling continued, growing somewhat louder. When we reached the door I cautiously unbolted it and threw it open, and as the moon streamed revealingly down on the form silhouetted there, West did a peculiar thing. Despite the obvious danger of attracting notice and bringing down on our heads the dreaded police investigation—a thing which after all was mercifully averted by the relative isolation of our cottage—my friend suddenly, excitedly, and unnecessarily emptied all six chambers of his revolver into the nocturnal visitor.
     For that visitor was neither Italian nor policeman. Looming hideously against the spectral moon was a gigantic misshapen thing not to be imagined save in nightmares—a glassy-eyed, ink-black apparition nearly on all fours, covered with bits of mould, leaves, and vines, foul with caked blood, and having between its glistening teeth a snow-white, terrible, cylindrical object terminating in a tiny hand.

IV. The Scream of the Dead

The scream of a dead man gave to me that acute and added horror of Dr. Herbert West which harassed the latter years of our companionship. It is natural that such a thing as a dead man's scream should give horror, for it is obviously not a pleasing or ordinary occurrence; but I was used to similar experiences, hence suffered on this occasion only because of a particular circumstance. And, as I have implied, it was not of the dead man himself that I became afraid.
     Herbert West, whose associate and assistant I was, possessed scientific interests far beyond the usual routine of a village physician. That was why, when establishing his practice in Bolton, he had chosen an isolated house near the potter's field. Briefly and brutally stated, West's sole absorbing interest was a secret study of the phenomena of life and its cessation, leading toward the reanimation of the dead through injections of an excitant solution. For this ghastly experimenting it was necessary to have a constant supply of very fresh human bodies; very fresh because even the least decay hopelessly damaged the brain structure, and human because we found that the solution had to be compounded differently for different types of organisms. Scores of rabbits and guinea-pigs had been killed and treated, but their trail was a blind one. West had never fully succeeded because he had never been able to secure a corpse sufficiently fresh. What he wanted were bodies from which vitality had only just departed; bodies with every cell intact and capable of receiving again the impulse toward that mode of motion called life. There was hope that this second and artificial life might be made perpetual by repetitions of the injection, but we had learned that an ordinary natural life would not respond to the action. To establish the artificial motion, natural life must be extinct—the specimens must be very fresh, but genuinely dead.
     The awesome quest had begun when West and I were students at the Miskatonic University Medical School in Arkham, vividly conscious for the first time of the thoroughly mechanical nature of life. That was seven years before, but West looked scarcely a day older now—he was small, blond, clean-shaven, soft-voiced, and spectacled, with only an occasional flash of a cold blue eye to tell of the hardening and growing fanaticism of his character under the pressure of his terrible investigations. Our experiences had often been hideous in the extreme; the results of defective reanimation, when lumps of graveyard clay had been galvanised into morbid, unnatural, and brainless motion by various modifications of the vital solution.
     One thing had uttered a nerve-shattering scream; another had risen violently, beaten us both to unconsciousness, and run amuck in a shocking way before it could be placed behind asylum bars; still another, a loathsome African monstrosity, had clawed out of its shallow grave and done a deed—West had had to shoot that object. We could not get bodies fresh enough to shew any trace of reason when reanimated, so had perforce created nameless horrors. It was disturbing to think that one, perhaps two, of our monsters still lived—that thought haunted us shadowingly, till finally West disappeared under frightful circumstances. But at the time of the scream in the cellar laboratory of the isolated Bolton cottage, our fears were subordinate to our anxiety for extremely fresh specimens. West was more avid than I, so that it almost seemed to me that he looked half-covetously at any very healthy living physique.
     It was in July, 1910, that the bad luck regarding specimens began to turn. I had been on a long visit to my parents in Illinois, and upon my return found West in a state of singular elation. He had, he told me excitedly, in all likelihood solved the problem of freshness through an approach from an entirely new angle—that of artificial preservation. I had known that he was working on a new and highly unusual embalming compound, and was not surprised that it had turned out well; but until he explained the details I was rather puzzled as to how such a compound could help in our work, since the objectionable staleness of the specimens was largely due to delay occurring before we secured them. At last fate had been kind, so that on this occasion there lay in the secret cellar laboratory a corpse whose decay could not by any possibility have begun. What would happen on reanimation, and whether we could hope for a revival of mind and reason, West did not venture to predict. The experiment would be a landmark in our studies, and he had saved the new body for my return, so that both might share the spectacle in accustomed fashion.
     West told me how he had obtained the specimen. It had been a vigorous man; a well-dressed stranger just off the train on his way to transact some business with the Bolton Worsted Mills. The walk through the town had been long, and by the time the traveller paused at our cottage to ask the way to the factories his heart had become greatly overtaxed. He had refused a stimulant, and had suddenly dropped dead only a moment later. The body, as might be expected, seemed to West a heaven-sent gift. In his brief conversation the stranger had made it clear that he was unknown in Bolton, and a search of his pockets subsequently revealed him to be one Robert Leavitt of St. Louis, apparently without a family to make instant inquiries about his disappearance. If this man could not be restored to life, no one would know of our experiment. We buried our materials in a dense strip of woods between the house and the potter's field. If, on the other hand, he could be restored, our fame would be brilliantly and perpetually established. So without delay West had injected into the body's wrist the compound which would hold it fresh for use after my arrival. The matter of the presumably weak heart, which to my mind imperiled the success of our experiment, did not appear to trouble West extensively. He hoped at last to obtain what he had never obtained before—a rekindled spark of reason and perhaps a normal, living creature.
     So on the night of July 18, 1910, Herbert West and I stood in the cellar laboratory and gazed at a white, silent figure beneath the dazzling arc-light. The embalming compound had worked uncannily well, for as I stared fascinatedly at the sturdy frame which had lain two weeks without stiffening I was moved to seek West's assurance that the thing was really dead. This assurance he gave readily enough; reminding me that the reanimating solution was never used without careful tests as to life; since it could have no effect if any of the original vitality were present. As West proceeded to take preliminary steps, I was impressed by the vast intricacy of the new experiment; an intricacy so vast that he could trust no hand less delicate than his own. Forbidding me to touch the body, he first injected a drug in the wrist just beside the place his needle had punctured when injecting the embalming compound. This, he said, was to neutralise the compound and release the system to a normal relaxation so that the reanimating solution might freely work when injected. Slightly later, when a change and a gentle tremor seemed to affect the dead limbs, West stuffed a pillow-like object violently over the twitching face, not withdrawing it until the corpse appeared quiet and ready for our attempt at reanimation. The pale enthusiast now applied some last perfunctory tests for absolute lifelessness, withdrew satisfied, and finally injected into the left arm an accurately measured amount of the vital elixir, prepared during the afternoon with a greater care than we had used since college days, when our feats were new and groping. I cannot express the wild, breathless suspense with which we waited for results on this first really fresh specimen—the first we could reasonably expect to open its lips in rational speech, perhaps to tell of what it had seen beyond the unfathomable abyss.
     West was a materialist, believing in no soul and attributing all the working of consciousness to bodily phenomena; consequently he looked for no revelation of hideous secrets from gulfs and caverns beyond death's barrier. I did not wholly disagree with him theoretically, yet held vague instinctive remnants of the primitive faith of my forefathers; so that I could not help eyeing the corpse with a certain amount of awe and terrible expectation. Besides—I could not extract from my memory that hideous, inhuman shriek we heard on the night we tried our first experiment in the deserted farmhouse at Arkham.
     Very little time had elapsed before I saw the attempt was not to be a total failure. A touch of colour came to cheeks hitherto chalk-white, and spread out under the curiously ample stubble of sandy beard. West, who had his hand on the pulse of the left wrist, suddenly nodded significantly; and almost simultaneously a mist appeared on the mirror inclined above the body's mouth. There followed a few spasmodic muscular motions, and then an audible breathing and visible motion of the chest. I looked at the closed eyelids, and thought I detected a quivering. Then the lids opened, shewing eyes which were grey, calm, and alive, but still unintelligent and not even curious.
     In a moment of fantastic whim I whispered questions to the reddening ears; questions of other worlds of which the memory might still be present. Subsequent terror drove them from my mind, but I think the last one, which I repeated, was Where have you been? I do not yet know whether I was answered or not, for no sound came from the well-shaped mouth; but I do know that at that moment I firmly thought the thin lips moved silently, forming syllables I would have vocalised as only now if that phrase had possessed any sense or relevancy. At that moment, as I say, I was elated with the conviction that the one great goal had been attained; and that for the first time a reanimated corpse had uttered distinct words impelled by actual reason. In the next moment there was no doubt about the triumph; no doubt that the solution had truly accomplished, at least temporarily, its full mission of restoring rational and articulate life to the dead. But in that triumph there came to me the greatest of all horrors—not horror of the thing that spoke, but of the deed that I had witnessed and of the man with whom my professional fortunes were joined.
     For that very fresh body, at last writhing into full and terrifying consciousness with eyes dilated at the memory of its last scene on earth, threw out its frantic hands in a life and death struggle with the air; and suddenly collapsing into a second and final dissolution from which there could be no return, screamed out the cry that will ring eternally in my aching brain
     Help! Keep off, you cursed little tow-head fiend—keep that damned needle away from me!

V. The Horror from the Shadows

Many men have related hideous things, not mentioned in print, which happened on the battlefields of the Great War. Some of these things have made me faint, others have convulsed me with devastating nausea, while still others have made me tremble and look behind me in the dark; yet despite the worst of them I believe I can myself relate the most hideous thing of all—the shocking, the unnatural, the unbelievable horror from the shadows.
     In 1915 I was a physician with the rank of First Lieutenant in a Canadian regiment in Flanders, one of many Americans to precede the government itself into the gigantic struggle. I had not entered the army on my own initiative, but rather as a natural result of the enlistment of the man whose indispensable assistant I was—the celebrated Boston surgical specialist, Dr. Herbert West. Dr. West had been avid for a chance to serve as surgeon in a great war, and when the chance had come he carried me with him almost against my will. There were reasons why I would have been glad to let the war separate us; reasons why I found the practice of medicine and the companionship of West more and more irritating; but when he had gone to Ottawa and through a colleague's influence secured a medical commission as Major, I could not resist the imperious persuasion of one determined that I should accompany him in my usual capacity.
     When I say that Dr. West was avid to serve in battle, I do not mean to imply that he was either naturally warlike or anxious for the safety of civilisation. Always an ice-cold intellectual machine; slight, blond, blue-eyed, and spectacled; I think he secretly sneered at my occasional martial enthusiasms and censures of supine neutrality. There was, however, something he wanted in embattled Flanders; and in order to secure it he had to assume a military exterior. What he wanted was not a thing which many persons want, but something connected with the peculiar branch of medical science which he had chosen quite clandestinely to follow, and in which he had achieved amazing and occasionally hideous results. It was, in fact, nothing more or less than an abundant supply of freshly killed men in every stage of dismemberment.
     Herbert West needed fresh bodies because his life-work was the reanimation of the dead. This work was not known to the fashionable clientele who had so swiftly built up his fame after his arrival in Boston; but was only too well known to me, who had been his closest friend and sole assistant since the old days in Miskatonic University Medical School at Arkham. It was in those college days that he had begun his terrible experiments, first on small animals and then on human bodies shockingly obtained. There was a solution which he injected into the veins of dead things, and if they were fresh enough they responded in strange ways. He had had much trouble in discovering the proper formula, for each type of organism was found to need a stimulus especially adapted to it. Terror stalked him when he reflected on his partial failures; nameless things resulting from imperfect solutions or from bodies insufficiently fresh. A certain number of these failures had remained alive—one was in an asylum while others had vanished—and as he thought of conceivable yet virtually impossible eventualities he often shivered beneath his usual stolidity.
     West had soon learned that absolute freshness was the prime requisite for useful specimens, and had accordingly resorted to frightful and unnatural expedients in body-snatching. In college, and during our early practice together in the factory town of Bolton, my attitude toward him had been largely one of fascinated admiration; but as his boldness in methods grew, I began to develop a gnawing fear. I did not like the way he looked at healthy living bodies; and then there came a nightmarish session in the cellar laboratory when I learned that a certain specimen had been a living body when he secured it. That was the first time he had ever been able to revive the quality of rational thought in a corpse; and his success, obtained at such a loathsome cost, had completely hardened him.
     Of his methods in the intervening five years I dare not speak. I was held to him by sheer force of fear, and witnessed sights that no human tongue could repeat. Gradually I came to find Herbert West himself more horrible than anything he did—that was when it dawned on me that his once normal scientific zeal for prolonging life had subtly degenerated into a mere morbid and ghoulish curiosity and secret sense of charnel picturesqueness. His interest became a hellish and perverse addiction to the repellently and fiendishly abnormal; he gloated calmly over artificial monstrosities which would make most healthy men drop dead from fright and disgust; he became, behind his pallid intellectuality, a fastidious Baudelaire of physical experiment—a languid Elagabalus of the tombs.
     Dangers he met unflinchingly; crimes he committed unmoved. I think the climax came when he had proved his point that rational life can be restored, and had sought new worlds to conquer by experimenting on the reanimation of detached parts of bodies. He had wild and original ideas on the independent vital properties of organic cells and nerve-tissue separated from natural physiological systems; and achieved some hideous preliminary results in the form of never-dying, artificially nourished tissue obtained from the nearly hatched eggs of an indescribable tropical reptile. Two biological points he was exceedingly anxious to settle—first, whether any amount of consciousness and rational action be possible without the brain, proceeding from the spinal cord and various nerve-centres; and second, whether any kind of ethereal, intangible relation distinct from the material cells may exist to link the surgically separated parts of what has previously been a single living organism. All this research work required a prodigious supply of freshly slaughtered human flesh—and that was why Herbert West had entered the Great War.
     The phantasmal, unmentionable thing occurred one midnight late in March, 1915, in a field hospital behind the lines at St. Eloi. I wonder even now if it could have been other than a daemoniac dream of delirium. West had a private laboratory in an east room of the barn-like temporary edifice, assigned him on his plea that he was devising new and radical methods for the treatment of hitherto hopeless cases of maiming. There he worked like a butcher in the midst of his gory wares—I could never get used to the levity with which he handled and classified certain things. At times he actually did perform marvels of surgery for the soldiers; but his chief delights were of a less public and philanthropic kind, requiring many explanations of sounds which seemed peculiar even amidst that babel of the damned. Among these sounds were frequent revolver-shots—surely not uncommon on a battlefield, but distinctly uncommon in an hospital. Dr. West's reanimated specimens were not meant for long existence or a large audience. Besides human tissue, West employed much of the reptile embryo tissue which he had cultivated with such singular results. It was better than human material for maintaining life in organless fragments, and that was now my friend's chief activity. In a dark corner of the laboratory, over a queer incubating burner, he kept a large covered vat full of this reptilian cell-matter; which multiplied and grew puffily and hideously.
     On the night of which I speak we had a splendid new specimen—a man at once physically powerful and of such high mentality that a sensitive nervous system was assured. It was rather ironic, for he was the officer who had helped West to his commission, and who was now to have been our associate. Moreover, he had in the past secretly studied the theory of reanimation to some extent under West. Major Sir Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee, D.S.O., was the greatest surgeon in our division, and had been hastily assigned to the St. Eloi sector when news of the heavy fighting reached headquarters. He had come in an aëroplane piloted by the intrepid Lieut. Ronald Hill, only to be shot down when directly over his destination. The fall had been spectacular and awful; Hill was unrecognisable afterward, but the wreck yielded up the great surgeon in a nearly decapitated but otherwise intact condition. West had greedily seized the lifeless thing which had once been his friend and fellow-scholar; and I shuddered when he finished severing the head, placed it in his hellish vat of pulpy reptile-tissue to preserve it for future experiments, and proceeded to treat the decapitated body on the operating table. He injected new blood, joined certain veins, arteries, and nerves at the headless neck, and closed the ghastly aperture with engrafted skin from an unidentified specimen which had borne an officer's uniform. I knew what he wanted—to see if this highly organised body could exhibit, without its head, any of the signs of mental life which had distinguished Sir Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee. Once a student of reanimation, this silent trunk was now gruesomely called upon to exemplify it.
     I can still see Herbert West under the sinister electric light as he injected his reanimating solution into the arm of the headless body. The scene I cannot describe—I should faint if I tried it, for there is madness in a room full of classified charnel things, with blood and lesser human debris almost ankle-deep on the slimy floor, and with hideous reptilian abnormalities sprouting, bubbling, and baking over a winking bluish-green spectre of dim flame in a far corner of black shadows.
     The specimen, as West repeatedly observed, had a splendid nervous system. Much was expected of it; and as a few twitching motions began to appear, I could see the feverish interest on West's face. He was ready, I think, to see proof of his increasingly strong opinion that consciousness, reason, and personality can exist independently of the brain—that man has no central connective spirit, but is merely a machine of nervous matter, each section more or less complete in itself. In one triumphant demonstration West was about to relegate the mystery of life to the category of myth. The body now twitched more vigorously, and beneath our avid eyes commenced to heave in a frightful way. The arms stirred disquietingly, the legs drew up, and various muscles contracted in a repulsive kind of writhing. Then the headless thing threw out its arms in a gesture which was unmistakably one of desperation—an intelligent desperation apparently sufficient to prove every theory of Herbert West. Certainly, the nerves were recalling the man's last act in life; the struggle to get free of the falling aëroplane.
     What followed, I shall never positively know. It may have been wholly an hallucination from the shock caused at that instant by the sudden and complete destruction of the building in a cataclysm of German shell-fire—who can gainsay it, since West and I were the only proved survivors? West liked to think that before his recent disappearance, but there were times when he could not; for it was queer that we both had the same hallucination. The hideous occurrence itself was very simple, notable only for what it implied.
     The body on the table had risen with a blind and terrible groping, and we had heard a sound. I should not call that sound a voice, for it was too awful. And yet its timbre was not the most awful thing about it. Neither was its message—it had merely screamed, Jump, Ronald, for God's sake, jump! The awful thing was its source.
     For it had come from the large covered vat in that ghoulish corner of crawling black shadows.

VI. The Tomb-Legions

When Dr. Herbert West disappeared a year ago, the Boston police questioned me closely. They suspected that I was holding something back, and perhaps suspected graver things; but I could not tell them the truth because they would not have believed it. They knew, indeed, that West had been connected with activities beyond the credence of ordinary men; for his hideous experiments in the reanimation of dead bodies had long been too extensive to admit of perfect secrecy; but the final soul-shattering catastrophe held elements of daemoniac phantasy which make even me doubt the reality of what I saw.
     I was West's closest friend and only confidential assistant. We had met years before, in medical school, and from the first I had shared his terrible researches. He had slowly tried to perfect a solution which, injected into the veins of the newly deceased, would restore life; a labour demanding an abundance of fresh corpses and therefore involving the most unnatural actions. Still more shocking were the products of some of the experiments—grisly masses of flesh that had been dead, but that West waked to a blind, brainless, nauseous animation. These were the usual results, for in order to reawaken the mind it was necessary to have specimens so absolutely fresh that no decay could possibly affect the delicate brain-cells.
     This need for very fresh corpses had been West's moral undoing. They were hard to get, and one awful day he had secured his specimen while it was still alive and vigorous. A struggle, a needle, and a powerful alkaloid had transformed it to a very fresh corpse, and the experiment had succeeded for a brief and memorable moment; but West had emerged with a soul calloused and seared, and a hardened eye which sometimes glanced with a kind of hideous and calculating appraisal at men of especially sensitive brain and especially vigorous physique. Toward the last I became acutely afraid of West, for he began to look at me that way. People did not seem to notice his glances, but they noticed my fear; and after his disappearance used that as a basis for some absurd suspicions.
     West, in reality, was more afraid than I; for his abominable pursuits entailed a life of furtiveness and dread of every shadow. Partly it was the police he feared; but sometimes his nervousness was deeper and more nebulous, touching on certain indescribable things into which he had injected a morbid life, and from which he had not seen that life depart. He usually finished his experiments with a revolver, but a few times he had not been quick enough. There was that first specimen on whose rifled grave marks of clawing were later seen. There was also that Arkham professor's body which had done cannibal things before it had been captured and thrust unidentified into a madhouse cell at Sefton, where it beat the walls for sixteen years. Most of the other possibly surviving results were things less easy to speak of—for in later years West's scientific zeal had degenerated to an unhealthy and fantastic mania, and he had spent his chief skill in vitalising not entire human bodies but isolated parts of bodies, or parts joined to organic matter other than human. It had become fiendishly disgusting by the time he disappeared; many of the experiments could not even be hinted at in print. The Great War, through which both of us served as surgeons, had intensified this side of West.
     In saying that West's fear of his specimens was nebulous, I have in mind particularly its complex nature. Part of it came merely from knowing of the existence of such nameless monsters, while another part arose from apprehension of the bodily harm they might under certain circumstances do him. Their disappearance added horror to the situation—of them all West knew the whereabouts of only one, the pitiful asylum thing. Then there was a more subtle fear—a very fantastic sensation resulting from a curious experiment in the Canadian army in 1915. West, in the midst of a severe battle, had reanimated Major Sir Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee, D.S.O., a fellow-physician who knew about his experiments and could have duplicated them. The head had been removed, so that the possibilities of quasi-intelligent life in the trunk might be investigated. Just as the building was wiped out by a German shell, there had been a success. The trunk had moved intelligently; and, unbelievable to relate, we were both sickeningly sure that articulate sounds had come from the detached head as it lay in a shadowy corner of the laboratory. The shell had been merciful, in a way—but West could never feel as certain as he wished, that we two were the only survivors. He used to make shuddering conjectures about the possible actions of a headless physician with the power of reanimating the dead.
     West's last quarters were in a venerable house of much elegance, overlooking one of the oldest burying-grounds in Boston. He had chosen the place for purely symbolic and fantastically aesthetic reasons, since most of the interments were of the colonial period and therefore of little use to a scientist seeking very fresh bodies. The laboratory was in a sub-cellar secretly constructed by imported workmen, and contained a huge incinerator for the quiet and complete disposal of such bodies, or fragments and synthetic mockeries of bodies, as might remain from the morbid experiments and unhallowed amusements of the owner. During the excavation of this cellar the workmen had struck some exceedingly ancient masonry; undoubtedly connected with the old burying-ground, yet far too deep to correspond with any known sepulchre therein. After a number of calculations West decided that it represented some secret chamber beneath the tomb of the Averills, where the last interment had been made in 1768. I was with him when he studied the nitrous, dripping walls laid bare by the spades and mattocks of the men, and was prepared for the gruesome thrill which would attend the uncovering of centuried grave-secrets; but for the first time West's new timidity conquered his natural curiosity, and he betrayed his degenerating fibre by ordering the masonry left intact and plastered over. Thus it remained till that final hellish night; part of the walls of the secret laboratory. I speak of West's decadence, but must add that it was a purely mental and intangible thing. Outwardly he was the same to the last—calm, cold, slight, and yellow-haired, with spectacled blue eyes and a general aspect of youth which years and fears seemed never to change. He seemed calm even when he thought of that clawed grave and looked over his shoulder; even when he thought of the carnivorous thing that gnawed and pawed at Sefton bars.
     The end of Herbert West began one evening in our joint study when he was dividing his curious glance between the newspaper and me. A strange headline item had struck at him from the crumpled pages, and a nameless titan claw had seemed to reach down through sixteen years. Something fearsome and incredible had happened at Sefton Asylum fifty miles away, stunning the neighbourhood and baffling the police. In the small hours of the morning a body of silent men had entered the grounds and their leader had aroused the attendants. He was a menacing military figure who talked without moving his lips and whose voice seemed almost ventriloquially connected with an immense black case he carried. His expressionless face was handsome to the point of radiant beauty, but had shocked the superintendent when the hall light fell on it—for it was a wax face with eyes of painted glass. Some nameless accident had befallen this man. A larger man guided his steps; a repellent hulk whose bluish face seemed half eaten away by some unknown malady. The speaker had asked for the custody of the cannibal monster committed from Arkham sixteen years before; and upon being refused, gave a signal which precipitated a shocking riot. The fiends had beaten, trampled, and bitten every attendant who did not flee; killing four and finally succeeding in the liberation of the monster. Those victims who could recall the event without hysteria swore that the creatures had acted less like men than like unthinkable automata guided by the wax-faced leader. By the time help could be summoned, every trace of the men and of their mad charge had vanished.
     From the hour of reading this item until midnight, West sat almost paralysed. At midnight the doorbell rang, startling him fearfully. All the servants were asleep in the attic, so I answered the bell. As I have told the police, there was no wagon in the street; but only a group of strange-looking figures bearing a large square box which they deposited in the hallway after one of them had grunted in a highly unnatural voice, Express—prepaid. They filed out of the house with a jerky tread, and as I watched them go I had an odd idea that they were turning toward the ancient cemetery on which the back of the house abutted. When I slammed the door after them West came downstairs and looked at the box. It was about two feet square, and bore West's correct name and present address. It also bore the inscription, From Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee, St. Eloi, Flanders. Six years before, in Flanders, a shelled hospital had fallen upon the headless reanimated trunk of Dr. Clapham-Lee, and upon the detached head which—perhaps—had uttered articulate sounds.
     West was not even excited now. His condition was more ghastly. Quickly he said, It's the finish—but let's incinerate—this. We carried the thing down to the laboratory—listening. I do not remember many particulars—you can imagine my state of mind—but it is a vicious lie to say it was Herbert West's body which I put into the incinerator. We both inserted the whole unopened wooden box, closed the door, and started the electricity. Nor did any sound come from the box, after all.
     It was West who first noticed the falling plaster on that part of the wall where the ancient tomb masonry had been covered up. I was going to run, but he stopped me. Then I saw a small black aperture, felt a ghoulish wind of ice, and smelled the charnel bowels of a putrescent earth. There was no sound, but just then the electric lights went out and I saw outlined against some phosphorescence of the nether world a horde of silent toiling things which only insanity—or worse—could create. Their outlines were human, semi-human, fractionally human, and not human at all—the horde was grotesquely heterogeneous. They were removing the stones quietly, one by one, from the centuried wall. And then, as the breach became large enough, they came out into the laboratory in single file; led by a stalking thing with a beautiful head made of wax. A sort of mad-eyed monstrosity behind the leader seized on Herbert West. West did not resist or utter a sound. Then they all sprang at him and tore him to pieces before my eyes, bearing the fragments away into that subterranean vault of fabulous abominations. West's head was carried off by the wax-headed leader, who wore a Canadian officer's uniform. As it disappeared I saw that the blue eyes behind the spectacles were hideously blazing with their first touch of frantic, visible emotion.
     Servants found me unconscious in the morning. West was gone. The incinerator contained only unidentifiable ashes. Detectives have questioned me, but what can I say? The Sefton tragedy they will not connect with West; not that, nor the men with the box, whose existence they deny. I told them of the vault, and they pointed to the unbroken plaster wall and laughed. So I told them no more. They imply that I am a madman or a murderer—probably I am mad. But I might not be mad if those accursed tomb-legions had not been so silent.
     
     There is in the land of Mnar a vast still lake that is fed by no stream and out of which no stream flows. Ten thousand years ago there stood by its shore the mighty city of Sarnath, but Sarnath stands there no more.
     It is told that in the immemorial years when the world was young, before ever the men of Sarnath came to the land of Mnar, another city stood beside the lake; the grey stone city of Ib, which was old as the lake itself, and peopled with beings not pleasing to behold. Very odd and ugly were these beings, as indeed are most beings of a world yet inchoate and rudely fashioned. It is written on the brick cylinders of Kadatheron that the beings of Ib were in hue as green as the lake and the mists that rise above it; that they had bulging eyes, pouting, flabby lips, and curious ears, and were without voice. It is also written that they descended one night from the moon in a mist; they and the vast still lake and grey stone city Ib. However this may be, it is certain that they worshipped a sea-green stone idol chiselled in the likeness of Bokrug, the great water-lizard; before which they danced horribly when the moon was gibbous. And it is written in the papyrus of Ilarnek, that they one day discovered fire, and thereafter kindled flames on many ceremonial occasions. But not much is written of these beings, because they lived in very ancient times, and man is young, and knows little of the very ancient living things.
     After many aeons men came to the land of Mnar; dark shepherd folk with their fleecy flocks, who built Thraa, Ilarnek, and Kadatheron on the winding river Ai. And certain tribes, more hardy than the rest, pushed on to the border of the lake and built Sarnath at a spot where precious metals were found in the earth.
     Not far from the grey city of Ib did the wandering tribes lay the first stones of Sarnath, and at the beings of Ib they marvelled greatly. But with their marvelling was mixed hate, for they thought it not meet that beings of such aspect should walk about the world of men at dusk. Nor did they like the strange sculptures upon the grey monoliths of Ib, for those sculptures were terrible with great antiquity. Why the beings and the sculptures lingered so late in the world, even until the coming of men, none can tell; unless it was because the land of Mnar is very still, and remote from most other lands both of waking and of dream.
     As the men of Sarnath beheld more of the beings of Ib their hate grew, and it was not less because they found the beings weak, and soft as jelly to the touch of stones and spears and arrows. So one day the young warriors, the slingers and the spearmen and the bowmen, marched against Ib and slew all the inhabitants thereof, pushing the queer bodies into the lake with long spears, because they did not wish to touch them. And because they did not like the grey sculptured monoliths of Ib they cast these also into the lake; wondering from the greatness of the labour how ever the stones were brought from afar, as they must have been, since there is naught like them in all the land of Mnar or in the lands adjacent.
     Thus of the very ancient city of Ib was nothing spared save the sea-green stone idol chiselled in the likeness of Bokrug, the water-lizard. This the young warriors took back with them to Sarnath as a symbol of conquest over the old gods and beings of Ib, and a sign of leadership in Mnar. But on the night after it was set up in the temple a terrible thing must have happened, for weird lights were seen over the lake, and in the morning the people found the idol gone, and the high-priest Taran-Ish lying dead, as from some fear unspeakable. And before he died, Taran-Ish had scrawled upon the altar of chrysolite with coarse shaky strokes the sign of DOOM.
     After Taran-Ish there were many high-priests in Sarnath, but never was the sea-green stone idol found. And many centuries came and went, wherein Sarnath prospered exceedingly, so that only priests and old women remembered what Taran-Ish had scrawled upon the altar of chrysolite. Betwixt Sarnath and the city of Ilarnek arose a caravan route, and the precious metals from the earth were exchanged for other metals and rare cloths and jewels and books and tools for artificers and all things of luxury that are known to the people who dwell along the winding river Ai and beyond. So Sarnath waxed mighty and learned and beautiful, and sent forth conquering armies to subdue the neighbouring cities; and in time there sate upon a throne in Sarnath the kings of all the land of Mnar and of many lands adjacent.
     The wonder of the world and the pride of all mankind was Sarnath the magnificent. Of polished desert-quarried marble were its walls, in height 300 cubits and in breadth 75, so that chariots might pass each other as men drave them along the top. For full 500 stadia did they run, being open only on the side toward the lake; where a green stone sea-wall kept back the waves that rose oddly once a year at the festival of the destroying of Ib. In Sarnath were fifty streets from the lake to the gates of the caravans, and fifty more intersecting them. With onyx were they paved, save those whereon the horses and camels and elephants trod, which were paved with granite. And the gates of Sarnath were as many as the landward ends of the streets, each of bronze, and flanked by the figures of lions and elephants carven from some stone no longer known among men. The houses of Sarnath were of glazed brick and chalcedony, each having its walled garden and crystal lakelet. With strange art were they builded, for no other city had houses like them; and travellers from Thraa and Ilarnek and Kadatheron marvelled at the shining domes wherewith they were surmounted.
     But more marvellous still were the palaces and the temples, and the gardens made by Zokkar the olden king. There were many palaces, the least of which were mightier than any in Thraa or Ilarnek or Kadatheron. So high were they that one within might sometimes fancy himself beneath only the sky; yet when lighted with torches dipt in the oil of Dothur their walls shewed vast paintings of kings and armies, of a splendour at once inspiring and stupefying to the beholder. Many were the pillars of the palaces, all of tinted marble, and carven into designs of surpassing beauty. And in most of the palaces the floors were mosaics of beryl and lapis-lazuli and sardonyx and carbuncle and other choice materials, so disposed that the beholder might fancy himself walking over beds of the rarest flowers. And there were likewise fountains, which cast scented waters about in pleasing jets arranged with cunning art. Outshining all others was the palace of the kings of Mnar and of the lands adjacent. On a pair of golden crouching lions rested the throne, many steps above the gleaming floor. And it was wrought of one piece of ivory, though no man lives who knows whence so vast a piece could have come. In that palace there were also many galleries, and many amphitheatres where lions and men and elephants battled at the pleasure of the kings. Sometimes the amphitheatres were flooded with water conveyed from the lake in mighty aqueducts, and then were enacted stirring sea-fights, or combats betwixt swimmers and deadly marine things.
     Lofty and amazing were the seventeen tower-like temples of Sarnath, fashioned of a bright multi-coloured stone not known elsewhere. A full thousand cubits high stood the greatest among them, wherein the high-priests dwelt with a magnificence scarce less than that of the kings. On the ground were halls as vast and splendid as those of the palaces; where gathered throngs in worship of Zo-Kalar and Tamash and Lobon, the chief gods of Sarnath, whose incense-enveloped shrines were as the thrones of monarchs. Not like the eikons of other gods were those of Zo-Kalar and Tamash and Lobon, for so close to life were they that one might swear the graceful bearded gods themselves sate on the ivory thrones. And up unending steps of shining zircon was the tower-chamber, wherefrom the high-priests looked out over the city and the plains and the lake by day; and at the cryptic moon and significant stars and planets, and their reflections in the lake, by night. Here was done the very secret and ancient rite in detestation of Bokrug, the water-lizard, and here rested the altar of chrysolite which bore the DOOM-scrawl of Taran-Ish.
     Wonderful likewise were the gardens made by Zokkar the olden king. In the centre of Sarnath they lay, covering a great space and encircled by a high wall. And they were surmounted by a mighty dome of glass, through which shone the sun and moon and stars and planets when it was clear, and from which were hung fulgent images of the sun and moon and stars and planets when it was not clear. In summer the gardens were cooled with fresh odorous breezes skilfully wafted by fans, and in winter they were heated with concealed fires, so that in those gardens it was always spring. There ran little streams over bright pebbles, dividing meads of green and gardens of many hues, and spanned by a multitude of bridges. Many were the waterfalls in their courses, and many were the lilied lakelets into which they expanded. Over the streams and lakelets rode white swans, whilst the music of rare birds chimed in with the melody of the waters. In ordered terraces rose the green banks, adorned here and there with bowers of vines and sweet blossoms, and seats and benches of marble and porphyry. And there were many small shrines and temples where one might rest or pray to small gods.
     Each year there was celebrated in Sarnath the feast of the destroying of Ib, at which time wine, song, dancing, and merriment of every kind abounded. Great honours were then paid to the shades of those who had annihilated the odd ancient beings, and the memory of those beings and of their elder gods was derided by dancers and lutanists crowned with roses from the gardens of Zokkar. And the kings would look out over the lake and curse the bones of the dead that lay beneath it. At first the high-priests liked not these festivals, for there had descended amongst them queer tales of how the sea-green eikon had vanished, and how Taran-Ish had died from fear and left a warning. And they said that from their high tower they sometimes saw lights beneath the waters of the lake. But as many years passed without calamity even the priests laughed and cursed and joined in the orgies of the feasters. Indeed, had they not themselves, in their high tower, often performed the very ancient and secret rite in detestation of Bokrug, the water-lizard? And a thousand years of riches and delight passed over Sarnath, wonder of the world and pride of all mankind.
     Gorgeous beyond thought was the feast of the thousandth year of the destroying of Ib. For a decade had it been talked of in the land of Mnar, and as it drew nigh there came to Sarnath on horses and camels and elephants men from Thraa, Ilarnek, and Kadatheron, and all the cities of Mnar and the lands beyond. Before the marble walls on the appointed night were pitched the pavilions of princes and the tents of travellers, and all the shore resounded with the song of happy revellers. Within his banquet-hall reclined Nargis-Hei, the king, drunken with ancient wine from the vaults of conquered Pnath, and surrounded by feasting nobles and hurrying slaves. There were eaten many strange delicacies at that feast; peacocks from the isles of Nariel in the Middle Ocean, young goats from the distant hills of Implan, heels of camels from the Bnazic desert, nuts and spices from Cydathrian groves, and pearls from wave-washed Mtal dissolved in the vinegar of Thraa. Of sauces there were an untold number, prepared by the subtlest cooks in all Mnar, and suited to the palate of every feaster. But most prized of all the viands were the great fishes from the lake, each of vast size, and served up on golden platters set with rubies and diamonds.
     Whilst the king and his nobles feasted within the palace, and viewed the crowning dish as it awaited them on golden platters, others feasted elsewhere. In the tower of the great temple the priests held revels, and in pavilions without the walls the princes of neighbouring lands made merry. And it was the high-priest Gnai-Kah who first saw the shadows that descended from the gibbous moon into the lake, and the damnable green mists that arose from the lake to meet the moon and to shroud in a sinister haze the towers and the domes of fated Sarnath. Thereafter those in the towers and without the walls beheld strange lights on the water, and saw that the grey rock Akurion, which was wont to rear high above it near the shore, was almost submerged. And fear grew vaguely yet swiftly, so that the princes of Ilarnek and of far Rokol took down and folded their tents and pavilions and departed for the river Ai, though they scarce knew the reason for their departing.
     Then, close to the hour of midnight, all the bronze gates of Sarnath burst open and emptied forth a frenzied throng that blackened the plain, so that all the visiting princes and travellers fled away in fright. For on the faces of this throng was writ a madness born of horror unendurable, and on their tongues were words so terrible that no hearer paused for proof. Men whose eyes were wild with fear shrieked aloud of the sight within the king's banquet-hall, where through the windows were seen no longer the forms of Nargis-Hei and his nobles and slaves, but a horde of indescribable green voiceless things with bulging eyes, pouting, flabby lips, and curious ears; things which danced horribly, bearing in their paws golden platters set with rubies and diamonds containing uncouth flames. And the princes and travellers, as they fled from the doomed city of Sarnath on horses and camels and elephants, looked again upon the mist-begetting lake and saw the grey rock Akurion was quite submerged.
     Through all the land of Mnar and the lands adjacent spread the tales of those who had fled from Sarnath, and caravans sought that accursed city and its precious metals no more. It was long ere any traveller went thither, and even then only the brave and adventurous young men of distant Falona dared make the journey; adventurous young men of yellow hair and blue eyes, who are no kin to the men of Mnar. These men indeed went to the lake to view Sarnath; but though they found the vast still lake itself, and the grey rock Akurion which rears high above it near the shore, they beheld not the wonder of the world and pride of all mankind. Where once had risen walls of 300 cubits and towers yet higher, now stretched only the marshy shore, and where once had dwelt fifty millions of men now crawled only the detestable green water-lizard. Not even the mines of precious metal remained, for DOOM had come to Sarnath.
     But half buried in the rushes was spied a curious green idol of stone; an exceedingly ancient idol coated with seaweed and chiselled in the likeness of Bokrug, the great water-lizard. That idol, enshrined in the high temple at Ilarnek, was subsequently worshipped beneath the gibbous moon throughout the land of Mnar.
     
     When the last days were upon me, and the ugly trifles of existence began to drive me to madness like the small drops of water that torturers let fall ceaselessly upon one spot of their victim's body, I loved the irradiate refuge of sleep. In my dreams I found a little of the beauty I had vainly sought in life, and wandered through old gardens and enchanted woods.
     Once when the wind was soft and scented I heard the south calling, and sailed endlessly and languorously under strange stars.
     Once when the gentle rain fell I glided in a barge down a sunless stream under the earth till I reached another world of purple twilight, iridescent arbours, and undying roses.
     And once I walked through a golden valley that led to shadowy groves and ruins, and ended in a mighty wall green with antique vines, and pierced by a little gate of bronze.
     Many times I walked through that valley, and longer and longer would I pause in the spectral half-light where the giant trees squirmed and twisted grotesquely, and the grey ground stretched damply from trunk to trunk, sometimes disclosing the mould-stained stones of buried temples. And always the goal of my fancies was the mighty vine-grown wall with the little gate of bronze therein.
     After a while, as the days of waking became less and less bearable from their greyness and sameness, I would often drift in opiate peace through the valley and the shadowy groves, and wonder how I might seize them for my eternal dwelling-place, so that I need no more crawl back to a dull world stript of interest and new colours. And as I looked upon the little gate in the mighty wall, I felt that beyond it lay a dream-country from which, once it was entered, there would be no return.
     So each night in sleep I strove to find the hidden latch of the gate in the ivied antique wall, though it was exceedingly well hidden. And I would tell myself that the realm beyond the wall was not more lasting merely, but more lovely and radiant as well.
     Then one night in the dream-city of Zakarion I found a yellowed papyrus filled with the thoughts of dream-sages who dwelt of old in that city, and who were too wise ever to be born in the waking world. Therein were written many things concerning the world of dream, and among them was lore of a golden valley and a sacred grove with temples, and a high wall pierced by a little bronze gate. When I saw this lore, I knew that it touched on the scenes I had haunted, and I therefore read long in the yellowed papyrus.
     Some of the dream-sages wrote gorgeously of the wonders beyond the irrepassable gate, but others told of horror and disappointment. I knew not which to believe, yet longed more and more to cross forever into the unknown land; for doubt and secrecy are the lure of lures, and no new horror can be more terrible than the daily torture of the commonplace. So when I learned of the drug which would unlock the gate and drive me through, I resolved to take it when next I awaked.
     Last night I swallowed the drug and floated dreamily into the golden valley and the shadowy groves; and when I came this time to the antique wall, I saw that the small gate of bronze was ajar. From beyond came a glow that weirdly lit the giant twisted trees and the tops of the buried temples, and I drifted on songfully, expectant of the glories of the land from whence I should never return.
     But as the gate swung wider and the sorcery of drug and dream pushed me through, I knew that all sights and glories were at an end; for in that new realm was neither land nor sea, but only the white void of unpeopled and illimitable space. So, happier than I had ever dared hoped to be, I dissolved again into that native infinity of crystal oblivion from which the daemon Life had called me for one brief and desolate hour.
     
     The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown. These facts few psychologists will dispute, and their admitted truth must establish for all time the genuineness and dignity of the weirdly horrible tale as a literary form. Against it are discharged all the shafts of a materialistic sophistication which clings to frequently felt emotions and external events, and of a naively insipid idealism which deprecates the aesthetic motive and calls for a didactic literature to uplift the reader toward a suitable degree of smirking optimism. But in spite of all this opposition the weird tale has survived, developed, and attained remarkable heights of perfection; founded as it is on a profound and elementary principle whose appeal, if not always universal, must necessarily be poignant and permanent to minds of the requisite sensitiveness.
     The appeal of the spectrally macabre is generally narrow because it demands from the reader a certain degree of imagination and a capacity for detachment from every-day life. Relatively few are free enough from the spell of the daily routine to respond to rappings from outside, and tales of ordinary feelings and events, or of common sentimental distortions of such feelings and events, will always take first place in the taste of the majority; rightly, perhaps, since of course these ordinary matters make up the greater part of human experience. But the sensitive are always with us, and sometimes a curious streak of fancy invades an obscure corner of the very hardest head; so that no amount of rationalisation, reform, or Freudian analysis can quite annul the thrill of the chimney-corner whisper or the lonely wood. There is here involved a psychological pattern or tradition as real and as deeply grounded in mental experience as any other pattern or tradition of mankind; coeval with the religious feeling and closely related to many aspects of it, and too much a part of our inmost biological heritage to lose keen potency over a very important, though not numerically great, minority of our species.
     Man's first instincts and emotions formed his response to the environment in which he found himself. Definite feelings based on pleasure and pain grew up around the phenomena whose causes and effects he understood, whilst around those which he did not understand—and the universe teemed with them in the early days—were naturally woven such personifications, marvellous interpretations, and sensations of awe and fear as would be hit upon by a race having few and simple ideas and limited experience. The unknown, being likewise the unpredictable, became for our primitive forefathers a terrible and omnipotent source of boons and calamities visited upon mankind for cryptic and wholly extra-terrestrial reasons, and thus clearly belonging to spheres of existence whereof we know nothing and wherein we have no part. The phenomenon of dreaming likewise helped to build up the notion of an unreal or spiritual world; and in general, all the conditions of savage dawn-life so strongly conduced toward a feeling of the supernatural, that we need not wonder at the thoroughness with which man's very hereditary essence has become saturated with religion and superstition. That saturation must, as a matter of plain scientific fact, be regarded as virtually permanent so far as the subconscious mind and inner instincts are concerned; for though the area of the unknown has been steadily contracting for thousands of years, an infinite reservoir of mystery still engulfs most of the outer cosmos, whilst a vast residuum of powerful inherited associations clings around all the objects and processes that were once mysterious, however well they may now be explained. And more than this, there is an actual physiological fixation of the old instincts in our nervous tissue, which would make them obscurely operative even were the conscious mind to be purged of all sources of wonder.
     Because we remember pain and the menace of death more vividly than pleasure, and because our feelings toward the beneficent aspects of the unknown have from the first been captured and formalised by conventional religious rituals, it has fallen to the lot of the darker and more maleficent side of cosmic mystery to figure chiefly in our popular supernatural folklore. This tendency, too, is naturally enhanced by the fact that uncertainty and danger are always closely allied; thus making any kind of an unknown world a world of peril and evil possibilities. When to this sense of fear and evil the inevitable fascination of wonder and curiosity is superadded, there is born a composite body of keen emotion and imaginative provocation whose vitality must of necessity endure as long as the human race itself. Children will always be afraid of the dark, and men with minds sensitive to hereditary impulse will always tremble at the thought of the hidden and fathomless worlds of strange life which may pulsate in the gulfs beyond the stars, or press hideously upon our own globe in unholy dimensions which only the dead and the moonstruck can glimpse.
     With this foundation, no one need wonder at the existence of a literature of cosmic fear. It has always existed, and always will exist; and no better evidence of its tenacious vigour can be cited than the impulse which now and then drives writers of totally opposite leanings to try their hands at it in isolated tales, as if to discharge from their minds certain phantasmal shapes which would otherwise haunt them. Thus Dickens wrote several eerie narratives; Browning, the hideous poem Childe Roland; Henry James, The Turn of the Screw; Dr. Holmes, the subtle novel Elsie Venner; F. Marion Crawford, The Upper Berth and a number of other examples; Mrs. Charlotte Perkins Gilman, social worker, The Yellow Wall Paper; whilst the humourist W. W. Jacobs produced that able melodramatic bit called The Monkey's Paw.
     This type of fear-literature must not be confounded with a type externally similar but psychologically widely different; the literature of mere physical fear and the mundanely gruesome. Such writing, to be sure, has its place, as has the conventional or even whimsical or humorous ghost story where formalism or the author's knowing wink removes the true sense of the morbidly unnatural; but these things are not the literature of cosmic fear in its purest sense. The true weird tale has something more than secret murder, bloody bones, or a sheeted form clanking chains according to rule. A certain atmosphere of breathless and unexplainable dread of outer, unknown forces must be present; and there must be a hint, expressed with a seriousness and portentousness becoming its subject, of that most terrible conception of the human brain—a malign and particular suspension or defeat of those fixed laws of Nature which are our only safeguard against the assaults of chaos and the daemons of unplumbed space.
     Naturally we cannot expect all weird tales to conform absolutely to any theoretical model. Creative minds are uneven, and the best of fabrics have their dull spots. Moreover, much of the choicest weird work is unconscious; appearing in memorable fragments scattered through material whose massed effect may be of a very different cast. Atmosphere is the all-important thing, for the final criterion of authenticity is not the dovetailing of a plot but the creation of a given sensation. We may say, as a general thing, that a weird story whose intent is to teach or produce a social effect, or one in which the horrors are finally explained away by natural means, is not a genuine tale of cosmic fear; but it remains a fact that such narratives often possess, in isolated sections, atmospheric touches which fulfil every condition of true supernatural horror-literature. Therefore we must judge a weird tale not by the author's intent, or by the mere mechanics of the plot; but by the emotional level which it attains at its least mundane point. If the proper sensations are excited, such a high spot must be admitted on its own merits as weird literature, no matter how prosaically it is later dragged down. The one test of the really weird is simply this—whether or not there be excited in the reader a profound sense of dread, and of contact with unknown spheres and powers; a subtle attitude of awed listening, as if for the beating of black wings or the scratching of outside shapes and entities on the known universe's utmost rim. And of course, the more completely and unifiedly a story conveys this atmosphere, the better it is as a work of art in the given medium.

II. The Dawn of the Horror-Tale

     As may naturally be expected of a form so closely connected with primal emotion, the horror-tale is as old as human thought and speech themselves.
     Cosmic terror appears as an ingredient of the earliest folklore of all races, and is crystallised in the most archaic ballads, chronicles, and sacred writings. It was, indeed, a prominent feature of the elaborate ceremonial magic, with its rituals for the evocation of daemons and spectres, which flourished from prehistoric times, and which reached its highest development in Egypt and the Semitic nations. Fragments like the Book of Enoch and the Claviculae of Solomon well illustrate the power of the weird over the ancient Eastern mind, and upon such things were based enduring systems and traditions whose echoes extend obscurely even to the present time. Touches of this transcendental fear are seen in classic literature, and there is evidence of its still greater emphasis in a ballad literature which paralleled the classic stream but vanished for lack of a written medium. The Middle Ages, steeped in fanciful darkness, gave it an enormous impulse toward expression; and East and West alike were busy preserving and amplifying the dark heritage, both of random folklore and of academically formulated magic and cabbalism, which had descended to them. Witch, werewolf, vampire, and ghoul brooded ominously on the lips of bard and grandam, and needed but little encouragement to take the final step across the boundary that divides the chanted tale or song from the formal literary composition. In the Orient, the weird tale tended to assume a gorgeous colouring and sprightliness which almost transmuted it into sheer phantasy. In the West, where the mystical Teuton had come down from his black Boreal forests and the Celt remembered strange sacrifices in Druidic groves, it assumed a terrible intensity and convincing seriousness of atmosphere which doubled the force of its half-told, half-hinted horrors.
     Much of the power of Western horror-lore was undoubtedly due to the hidden but often suspected presence of a hideous cult of nocturnal worshippers whose strange customs—descended from pre-Aryan and pre-agricultural times when a squat race of Mongoloids roved over Europe with their flocks and herds—were rooted in the most revolting fertility-rites of immemorial antiquity. This secret religion, stealthily handed down amongst peasants for thousands of years despite the outward reign of the Druidic, Graeco-Roman, and Christian faiths in the regions involved, was marked by wild Witches' Sabbaths in lonely woods and atop distant hills on Walpurgis-Night and Hallowe'en, the traditional breeding-seasons of the goats and sheep and cattle; and became the source of vast riches of sorcery-legend, besides provoking extensive witchcraft- prosecutions of which the Salem affair forms the chief American example. Akin to it in essence, and perhaps connected with it in fact, was the frightful secret system of inverted theology or Satan-worship which produced such horrors as the famous Black Mass; whilst operating toward the same end we may note the activities of those whose aims were somewhat more scientific or philosophical—the astrologers, cabbalists, and alchemists of the Albertus Magnus or Raymond Lully type, with whom such rude ages invariably abound. The prevalence and depth of the mediaeval horror-spirit in Europe, intensified by the dark despair which waves of pestilence brought, may be fairly gauged by the grotesque carvings slyly introduced into much of the finest later Gothic ecclesiastical work of the time; the daemoniac gargoyles of Notre Dame and Mont St. Michel being among the most famous specimens. And throughout the period, it must be remembered, there existed amongst educated and uneducated alike a most unquestioning faith in every form of the supernatural; from the gentlest of Christian doctrines to the most monstrous morbidities of witchcraft and black magic. It was from no empty background that the Renaissance magicians and alchemists—Nostradamus, Trithemius, Dr. John Dee, Robert Fludd, and the like—were born.
     In this fertile soil were nourished types and characters of sombre myth and legend which persist in weird literature to this day, more or less disguised or altered by modern technique. Many of them were taken from the earliest oral sources, and form part of mankind's permanent heritage. The shade which appears and demands the burial of its bones, the daemon lover who comes to bear away his still living bride, the death-fiend or psychopomp riding the night-wind, the man-wolf, the sealed chamber, the deathless sorcerer—all these may be found in that curious body of mediaeval lore which the late Mr. Baring-Gould so effectively assembled in book form. Wherever the mystic Northern blood was strongest, the atmosphere of the popular tales became most intense; for in the Latin races there is a touch of basic rationality which denies to even their strangest superstitions many of the overtones of glamour so characteristic of our own forest-born and ice-fostered whisperings.
     Just as all fiction first found extensive embodiment in poetry, so is it in poetry that we first encounter the permanent entry of the weird into standard literature. Most of the ancient instances, curiously enough, are in prose; as the werewolf incident in Petronius, the gruesome passages in Apuleius, the brief but celebrated letter of Pliny the Younger to Sura, and the odd compilation On Wonderful Events by the Emperor Hadrian's Greek freedman, Phlegon. It is in Phlegon that we first find that hideous tale of the corpse-bride, Philinnion and Machates, later related by Proclus and in modern times forming the inspiration of Goethe's Bride of Corinth and Washington Irving's German Student. But by the time the old Northern myths take literary form, and in that later time when the weird appears as a steady element in the literature of the day, we find it mostly in metrical dress; as indeed we find the greater part of the strictly imaginative writing of the Middle Ages and Renaissance. The Scandinavian Eddas and Sagas thunder with cosmic horror, and shake with the stark fear of Ymir and his shapeless spawn; whilst our own Anglo-Saxon Beowulf and the later Continental Nibelung tales are full of eldritch weirdness. Dante is a pioneer in the classic capture of macabre atmosphere, and in Spenser's stately stanzas will be seen more than a few touches of fantastic terror in landscape, incident, and character. Prose literature gives us Malory's Morte d'Arthur, in which are presented many ghastly situations taken from early ballad sources—the theft of the sword and silk from the corpse in Chapel Perilous by Sir Launcelot, the ghost of Sir Gawaine, and the tomb-fiend seen by Sir Galahad—whilst other and cruder specimens were doubtless set forth in the cheap and sensational chapbooks vulgarly hawked about and devoured by the ignorant. In Elizabethan drama, with its Dr. Faustus, the witches in Macbeth, the ghost in Hamlet, and the horrible gruesomeness of Webster, we may easily discern the strong hold of the daemoniac on the public mind; a hold intensified by the very real fear of living witchcraft, whose terrors, first wildest on the Continent, begin to echo loudly in English ears as the witch-hunting crusades of James the First gain headway. To the lurking mystical prose of the ages is added a long line of treatises on witchcraft and daemonology which aid in exciting the imagination of the reading world.
     Through the seventeenth and into the eighteenth century we behold a growing mass of fugitive legendry and balladry of darksome cast; still, however, held down beneath the surface of polite and accepted literature. Chapbooks of horror and weirdness multiplied, and we glimpse the eager interest of the people through fragments like Defoe's Apparition of Mrs. Veal, a homely tale of a dead woman's spectral visit to a distant friend, written to advertise covertly a badly selling theological disquisition on death. The upper orders of society were now losing faith in the supernatural, and indulging in a period of classic rationalism. Then, beginning with the translations of Eastern tales in Queen Anne's reign and taking definite form toward the middle of the century, comes the revival of romantic feeling—the era of new joy in Nature, and in the radiance of past times, strange scenes, bold deeds, and incredible marvels. We feel it first in the poets, whose utterances take on new qualities of wonder, strangeness, and shuddering. And finally, after the timid appearance of a few weird scenes in the novels of the day—such as Smollett's Adventures of Ferdinand, Count Fathom—the released instinct precipitates itself in the birth of a new school of writing; the Gothic school of horrible and fantastic prose fiction, long and short, whose literary posterity is destined to become so numerous, and in many cases so resplendent in artistic merit. It is, when one reflects upon it, genuinely remarkable that weird narration as a fixed and academically recognised literary form should have been so late of final birth. The impulse and atmosphere are as old as man, but the typical weird tale of standard literature is a child of the eighteenth century.

III. The Early Gothic Novel

     The shadow-haunted landscapes of Ossian, the chaotic visions of William Blake, the grotesque witch-dances in Burns's Tam O'Shanter, the sinister daemonism of Coleridge's Christabel and Ancient Mariner, the ghostly charm of James Hogg's Kilmeny, and the more restrained approaches to cosmic horror in Lamia and many of Keats's other poems, are typical British illustrations of the advent of the weird to formal literature. Our Teutonic cousins of the Continent were equally receptive to the rising flood, and Bürger's Wild Huntsman and the even more famous daemon-bridegroom ballad of Lenore—both imitated in English by Scott, whose respect for the supernatural was always great—are only a taste of the eerie wealth which German song had commenced to provide. Thomas Moore adapted from such sources the legend of the ghoulish statue-bride (later used by Prosper Mérimée in The Venus of Ille, and traceable back to great antiquity) which echoes so shiveringly in his ballad of The Ring; whilst Goethe's deathless masterpiece Faust, crossing from mere balladry into the classic, cosmic tragedy of the ages, may be held as the ultimate height to which this German poetic impulse arose.
     But it remained for a very sprightly and worldly Englishman—none other than Horace Walpole himself—to give the growing impulse definite shape and become the actual founder of the literary horror-story as a permanent form. Fond of mediaeval romance and mystery as a dilettante's diversion, and with a quaintly imitated Gothic castle as his abode at Strawberry Hill, Walpole in 1764 published The Castle of Otranto; a tale of the supernatural which, though thoroughly unconvincing and mediocre in itself, was destined to exert an almost unparalleled influence on the literature of the weird. First venturing it only as a translation by one William Marshal, Gent. from the Italian of a mythical Onuphrio Muralto, the author later acknowledged his connexion with the book and took pleasure in its wide and instantaneous popularity—a popularity which extended to many editions, early dramatisation, and wholesale imitation both in England and in Germany.
     The story—tedious, artificial, and melodramatic—is further impaired by a brisk and prosaic style whose urbane sprightliness nowhere permits the creation of a truly weird atmosphere. It tells of Manfred, an unscrupulous and usurping prince determined to found a line, who after the mysterious sudden death of his only son Conrad on the latter's bridal morn, attempts to put away his wife Hippolita and wed the lady destined for the unfortunate youth—the lad, by the way, having been crushed by the preternatural fall of a gigantic helmet in the castle courtyard. Isabella, the widowed bride, flees from this design; and encounters in subterranean crypts beneath the castle a noble young preserver, Theodore, who seems to be a peasant yet strangely resembles the old lord Alfonso who ruled the domain before Manfred's time. Shortly thereafter supernatural phenomena assail the castle in divers ways; fragments of gigantic armour being discovered here and there, a portrait walking out of its frame, a thunderclap destroying the edifice, and a colossal armoured spectre of Alfonso rising out of the ruins to ascend through parting clouds to the bosom of St. Nicholas. Theodore, having wooed Manfred's daughter Matilda and lost her through death—for she is slain by her father by mistake—is discovered to be the son of Alfonso and rightful heir to the estate. He concludes the tale by wedding Isabella and preparing to live happily ever after, whilst Manfred—whose usurpation was the cause of his son's supernatural death and his own supernatural harassings—retires to a monastery for penitence; his saddened wife seeking asylum in a neighbouring convent.
     Such is the tale; flat, stilted, and altogether devoid of the true cosmic horror which makes weird literature. Yet such was the thirst of the age for those touches of strangeness and spectral antiquity which it reflects, that it was seriously received by the soundest readers and raised in spite of its intrinsic ineptness to a pedestal of lofty importance in literary history. What it did above all else was to create a novel type of scene, puppet-characters, and incidents; which, handled to better advantage by writers more naturally adapted to weird creation, stimulated the growth of an imitative Gothic school which in turn inspired the real weavers of cosmic terror—the line of actual artists beginning with Poe. This novel dramatic paraphernalia consisted first of all of the Gothic castle, with its awesome antiquity, vast distances and ramblings, deserted or ruined wings, damp corridors, unwholesome hidden catacombs, and galaxy of ghosts and appalling legends, as a nucleus of suspense and daemoniac fright. In addition, it included the tyrannical and malevolent nobleman as villain; the saintly, longpersecuted, and generally insipid heroine who undergoes the major terrors and serves as a point of view and focus for the reader's sympathies; the valorous and immaculate hero, always of high birth but often in humble disguise; the convention of high-sounding foreign names, mostly Italian, for the characters; and the infinite array of stage properties which includes strange lights, damp trap-doors, extinguished lamps, mouldy hidden manuscripts, creaking hinges, shaking arras, and the like. All this paraphernalia reappears with amusing sameness, yet sometimes with tremendous effect, throughout the history of the Gothic novel; and is by no means extinct even today, though subtler technique now forces it to assume a less naive and obvious form. An harmonious milieu for a new school had been found, and the writing world was not slow to grasp the opportunity.
     German romance at once responded to the Walpole influence, and soon became a byword for the weird and ghastly. In England one of the first imitators was the celebrated Mrs. Barbauld, then Miss Aikin, who in 1773 published an unfinished fragment called Sir Bertrand, in which the strings of genuine terror were truly touched with no clumsy hand. A nobleman on a dark and lonely moor, attracted by a tolling bell and distant light, enters a strange and ancient turreted castle whose doors open and close and whose bluish will-o'-the-wisps lead up mysterious staircases toward dead hands and animated black statues. A coffin with a dead lady, whom Sir Bertrand kisses, is finally reached; and upon the kiss the scene dissolves to give place to a splendid apartment where the lady, restored to life, holds a banquet in honour of her rescuer. Walpole admired this tale, though he accorded less respect to an even more prominent offspring of his Otranto—The Old English Baron, by Clara Reeve, published in 1777. Truly enough, this tale lacks the real vibration to the note of outer darkness and mystery which distinguishes Mrs. Barbauld's fragment; and though less crude than Walpole's novel, and more artistically economical of horror in its possession of only one spectral figure, it is nevertheless too definitely insipid for greatness. Here again we have the virtuous heir to the castle disguised as a peasant and restored to his heritage through the ghost of his father; and here again we have a case of wide popularity leading to many editions, dramatisation, and ultimate translation into French. Miss Reeve wrote another weird novel, unfortunately unpublished and lost.
     The Gothic novel was now settled as a literary form, and instances multiply bewilderingly as the eighteenth century draws toward its close. The Recess, written in 1785 by Mrs. Sophia Lee, has the historic element, revolving round the twin daughters of Mary, Queen of Scots; and though devoid of the supernatural, employs the Walpole scenery and mechanism with great dexterity. Five years later, and all existing lamps are paled by the rising of a fresh luminary of wholly superior order—Mrs. Ann Radcliffe (1764–1823), whose famous novels made terror and suspense a fashion, and who set new and higher standards in the domain of macabre and fear-inspiring atmosphere despite a provoking custom of destroying her own phantoms at the last through laboured mechanical explanations. To the familiar Gothic trappings of her predecessors Mrs. Radcliffe added a genuine sense of the unearthly in scene and incident which closely approached genius; every touch of setting and action contributing artistically to the impression of illimitable frightfulness which she wished to convey. A few sinister details like a track of blood on castle stairs, a groan from a distant vault, or a weird song in a nocturnal forest can with her conjure up the most powerful images of imminent horror; surpassing by far the extravagant and toilsome elaborations of others. Nor are these images in themselves any the less potent because they are explained away before the end of the novel. Mrs. Radcliffe's visual imagination was very strong, and appears as much in her delightful landscape touches—always in broad, glamorously pictorial outline, and never in close detail—as in her weird phantasies. Her prime weaknesses, aside from the habit of prosaic disillusionment, are a tendency toward erroneous geography and history and a fatal predilection for bestrewing her novels with insipid little poems, attributed to one or another of the characters.
     Mrs. Radcliffe wrote six novels; The Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne (1789), A Sicilian Romance (1790), The Romance of the Forest (1791), The Mysteries of Udolpho (1794), The Italian (1797), and Gaston de Blondeville, composed in 1802 but first published posthumously in 1826. Of these Udolpho is by far the most famous, and may be taken as a type of the early Gothic tale at its best. It is the chronicle of Emily, a young Frenchwoman transplanted to an ancient and portentous castle in the Apennines through the death of her parents and the marriage of her aunt to the lord of the castle—the scheming nobleman Montoni. Mysterious sounds, opened doors, frightful legends, and a nameless horror in a niche behind a black veil all operate in quick succession to unnerve the heroine and her faithful attendant Annette; but finally, after the death of her aunt, she escapes with the aid of a fellow-prisoner whom she has discovered. On the way home she stops at a chateau filled with fresh horrors—the abandoned wing where the departed chatelaine dwelt, and the bed of death with the black pall—but is finally restored to security and happiness with her lover Valancourt, after the clearing-up of a secret which seemed for a time to involve her birth in mystery. Clearly, this is only the familiar material re-worked; but it is so well re-worked that Udolpho will always be a classic. Mrs. Radcliffe's characters are puppets, but they are less markedly so than those of her forerunners. And in atmospheric creation she stands preëminent among those of her time.
     Of Mrs. Radcliffe's countless imitators, the American novelist Charles Brockden Brown stands the closest in spirit and method. Like her, he injured his creations by natural explanations; but also like her, he had an uncanny atmospheric power which gives his horrors a frightful vitality as long as they remain unexplained. He differed from her in contemptuously discarding the external Gothic paraphernalia and properties and choosing modern American scenes for his mysteries; but this repudiation did not extend to the Gothic spirit and type of incident. Brown's novels involve some memorably frightful scenes, and excel even Mrs. Radcliffe's in describing the operations of the perturbed mind. Edgar Huntly starts with a sleep-walker digging a grave, but is later impaired by touches of Godwinian didacticism. Ormond involves a member of a sinister secret brotherhood. That and Arthur Mervyn both describe the plague of yellow fever, which the author had witnessed in Philadelphia and New York. But Brown's most famous book is Wieland; or, The Transformation (1798), in which a Pennsylvania German, engulfed by a wave of religious fanaticism, hears voices and slays his wife and children as a sacrifice. His sister Clara, who tells the story, narrowly escapes. The scene, laid at the woodland estate of Mittingen on the Schuylkill's remote reaches, is drawn with extreme vividness; and the terrors of Clara, beset by spectral tones, gathering fears, and the sound of strange footsteps in the lonely house, are all shaped with truly artistic force. In the end a lame ventriloquial explanation is offered, but the atmosphere is genuine while it lasts. Carwin, the malign ventriloquist, is a typical villain of the Manfred or Montoni type.

IV. The Apex of Gothic Romance

     Horror in literature attains a new malignity in the work of Matthew Gregory Lewis (1775–1818), whose novel The Monk (1796) achieved marvellous popularity and earned him the nickname of Monk Lewis. This young author, educated in Germany and saturated with a body of wild Teuton lore unknown to Mrs. Radcliffe, turned to terror in forms more violent than his gentle predecessor had ever dared to think of; and produced as a result a masterpiece of active nightmare whose general Gothic cast is spiced with added stores of ghoulishness. The story is one of a Spanish monk, Ambrosio, who from a state of overproud virtue is tempted to the very nadir of evil by a fiend in the guise of the maiden Matilda; and who is finally, when awaiting death at the Inquisition's hands, induced to purchase escape at the price of his soul from the Devil, because he deems both body and soul already lost. Forthwith the mocking Fiend snatches him to a lonely place, tells him he has sold his soul in vain since both pardon and a chance for salvation were approaching at the moment of his hideous bargain, and completes the sardonic betrayal by rebuking him for his unnatural crimes, and casting his body down a precipice whilst his soul is borne off for ever to perdition. The novel contains some appalling descriptions such as the incantation in the vaults beneath the convent cemetery, the burning of the convent, and the final end of the wretched abbot. In the sub-plot where the Marquis de las Cisternas meets the spectre of his erring ancestress, The Bleeding Nun, there are many enormously potent strokes; notably the visit of the animated corpse to the Marquis's bedside, and the cabbalistic ritual whereby the Wandering Jew helps him to fathom and banish his dead tormentor. Nevertheless The Monk drags sadly when read as a whole. It is too long and too diffuse, and much of its potency is marred by flippancy and by an awkwardly excessive reaction against those canons of decorum which Lewis at first despised as prudish. One great thing may be said of the author; that he never ruined his ghostly visions with a natural explanation. He succeeded in breaking up the Radcliffian tradition and expanding the field of the Gothic novel. Lewis wrote much more than The Monk. His drama, The Castle Spectre, was produced in 1798, and he later found time to pen other fictions in ballad form—Tales of Terror (1799), Tales of Wonder (1801), and a succession of translations from the German.
     Gothic romances, both English and German, now appeared in multitudinous and mediocre profusion. Most of them were merely ridiculous in the light of mature taste, and Miss Austen's famous satire Northanger Abbey was by no means an unmerited rebuke to a school which had sunk far toward absurdity. This particular school was petering out, but before its final subordination there arose its last and greatest figure in the person of Charles Robert Maturin (1782–1824), an obscure and eccentric Irish clergyman. Out of an ample body of miscellaneous writing which includes one confused Radcliffian imitation called Fatal Revenge; or, The Family of Montorio (1807), Maturin at length evolved the vivid horror-masterpiece of Melmoth the Wanderer (1820), in which the Gothic tale climbed to altitudes of sheer spiritual fright which it had never known before.
     Melmoth is the tale of an Irish gentleman who, in the seventeenth century, obtained a preternaturally extended life from the Devil at the price of his soul. If he can persuade another to take the bargain off his hands, and assume his existing state, he can be saved; but this he can never manage to effect, no matter how assiduously he haunts those whom despair has made reckless and frantic. The framework of the story is very clumsy; involving tedious length, digressive episodes, narratives within narratives, and laboured dovetailing and coincidences; but at various points in the endless rambling there is felt a pulse of power undiscoverable in any previous work of this kind—a kinship to the essential truth of human nature, an understanding of the profoundest sources of actual cosmic fear, and a white heat of sympathetic passion on the writer's part which makes the book a true document of aesthetic self-expression rather than a mere clever compound of artifice. No unbiassed reader can doubt that with Melmoth an enormous stride in the evolution of the horror-tale is represented. Fear is taken out of the realm of the conventional and exalted into a hideous cloud over mankind's very destiny. Maturin's shudders, the work of one capable of shuddering himself, are of the sort that convince. Mrs. Radcliffe and Lewis are fair game for the parodist, but it would be difficult to find a false note in the feverishly intensified action and high atmospheric tension of the Irishman whose less sophisticated emotions and strain of Celtic mysticism gave him the finest possible natural equipment for his task. Without a doubt Maturin is a man of authentic genius, and he was so recognised by Balzac, who grouped Melmoth with Molière's Don Juan, Goethe's Faust, and Byron's Manfred as the supreme allegorical figures of modern European literature, and wrote a whimsical piece called Melmoth Reconciled, in which the Wanderer succeeds in passing his infernal bargain on to a Parisian bank defaulter, who in turn hands it along a chain of victims until a revelling gambler dies with it in his possession, and by his damnation ends the curse. Scott, Rossetti, Thackeray, and Baudelaire are the other titans who gave Maturin their unqualified admiration, and there is much significance in the fact that Oscar Wilde, after his disgrace and exile, chose for his last days in Paris the assumed name of Sebastian Melmoth.
     Melmoth contains scenes which even now have not lost their power to evoke dread. It begins with a deathbed—an old miser is dying of sheer fright because of something he has seen, coupled with a manuscript he has read and a family portrait which hangs in an obscure closet of his centuried home in County Wicklow. He sends to Trinity College, Dublin, for his nephew John; and the latter upon arriving notes many uncanny things. The eyes of the portrait in the closet glow horribly, and twice a figure strangely resembling the portrait appears momentarily at the door. Dread hangs over that house of the Melmoths, one of whose ancestors, J. Melmoth, 1646, the portrait represents. The dying miser declares that this man—at a date slightly before 1800—is alive. Finally the miser dies, and the nephew is told in the will to destroy both the portrait and a manuscript to be found in a certain drawer. Reading the manuscript, which was written late in the seventeenth century by an Englishman named Stanton, young John learns of a terrible incident in Spain in 1677, when the writer met a horrible fellow- countryman and was told of how he had stared to death a priest who tried to denounce him as one filled with fearsome evil. Later, after meeting the man again in London, Stanton is cast into a madhouse and visited by the stranger, whose approach is heralded by spectral music and whose eyes have a more than mortal glare. Melmoth the Wanderer—for such is the malign visitor—offers the captive freedom if he will take over his bargain with the Devil; but like all others whom Melmoth has approached, Stanton is proof against temptation. Melmoth's description of the horrors of a life in a madhouse, used to tempt Stanton, is one of the most potent passages of the book. Stanton is at length liberated, and spends the rest of his life tracking down Melmoth, whose family and ancestral abode he discovers. With the family he leaves the manuscript, which by young John's time is sadly ruinous and fragmentary. John destroys both portrait and manuscript, but in sleep is visited by his horrible ancestor, who leaves a black and blue mark on his wrist.
     Young John soon afterward receives as a visitor a shipwrecked Spaniard, Alonzo de Monçada, who has escaped from compulsory monasticism and from the perils of the Inquisition. He has suffered horribly—and the descriptions of his experiences under torment and in the vaults through which he once essays escape are classic—but had the strength to resist Melmoth the Wanderer when approached at his darkest hour in prison. At the house of a Jew who sheltered him after his escape he discovers a wealth of manuscript relating other exploits of Melmoth including his wooing of an Indian island maiden, Immalee, who later comes to her birthright in Spain and is known as Donna Isidora; and of his horrible marriage to her by the corpse of a dead anchorite at midnight in the ruined chapel of a shunned and abhorred monastery. Monçada's narrative to young John takes up the bulk of Maturin's four-volume book; this disproportion being considered one of the chief technical faults of the composition.
     At last the colloquies of John and Monçada are interrupted by the entrance of Melmoth the Wanderer himself, his piercing eyes now fading, and decrepitude swiftly overtaking him. The term of his bargain has approached its end, and he has come home after a century and a half to meet his fate. Warning all others from the room, no matter what sounds they may hear in the night, he awaits the end alone. Young John and Monçada hear frightful ululations, but do not intrude till silence comes toward morning. They then find the room empty. Clayey footprints lead out a rear door to a cliff overlooking the sea, and near the edge of the precipice is a track indicating the forcible dragging of some heavy body. The Wanderer's scarf is found on a crag some distance below the brink, but nothing further is ever seen or heard of him.
     Such is the story, and none can fail to notice the difference between this modulated, suggestive, and artistically moulded horror and—to use the words of Professor George Saintsbury—the artful but rather jejune rationalism of Mrs. Radcliffe, and the too often puerile extravagance, the bad taste, and the sometimes slipshod style of Lewis. Maturin's style in itself deserves particular praise, for its forcible directness and vitality lift it altogether above the pompous artificialities of which his predecessors are guilty. Professor Edith Birkhead, in her history of the Gothic novel, justly observes that with all his faults Maturin was the greatest as well as the last of the Goths. Melmoth was widely read and eventually dramatised, but its late date in the evolution of the Gothic tale deprived it of the tumultuous popularity of Udolpho and The Monk.

V. The Aftermath of Gothic Fiction

     Meanwhile other hands had not been idle, so that above the dreary plethora of trash like Marquis von Grosse's Horrid Mysteries (1796), Mrs. Roche's Children of the Abbey (1796), Miss Dacre's Zofloya; or, The Moor (1806), and the poet Shelley's schoolboy effusions Zastrozzi (1810) and St. Irvyne (1811) (both imitations of Zofloya ) there arose many memorable weird works both in English and German. Classic in merit, and markedly different from its fellows because of its foundation in the Oriental tale rather than the Walpolesque Gothic novel, is the celebrated History of the Caliph Vathek by the wealthy dilettante William Beckford, first written in the French language but published in an English translation before the appearance of the original. Eastern tales, introduced to European literature early in the eighteenth century through Galland's French translation of the inexhaustibly opulent Arabian Nights, had become a reigning fashion; being used both for allegory and for amusement. The sly humour which only the Eastern mind knows how to mix with weirdness had captivated a sophisticated generation, till Bagdad and Damascus names became as freely strown through popular literature as dashing Italian and Spanish ones were soon to be. Beckford, well read in Eastern romance, caught the atmosphere with unusual receptivity; and in his fantastic volume reflected very potently the haughty luxury, sly disillusion, bland cruelty, urbane treachery, and shadowy spectral horror of the Saracen spirit. His seasoning of the ridiculous seldom mars the force of his sinister theme, and the tale marches onward with a phantasmagoric pomp in which the laughter is that of skeletons feasting under Arabesque domes. Vathek is a tale of the grandson of the Caliph Haroun, who, tormented by that ambition for super-terrestrial power, pleasure, and learning which animates the average Gothic villain or Byronic hero (essentially cognate types), is lured by an evil genius to seek the subterranean throne of the mighty and fabulous pre-Adamite sultans in the fiery halls of Eblis, the Mahometan Devil. The descriptions of Vathek's palaces and diversions, of his scheming sorceress-mother Carathis and her witch-tower with the fifty one-eyed negresses, of his pilgrimage to the haunted ruins of Istakhar (Persepolis) and of the impish bride Nouronihar whom he treacherously acquired on the way, of Istakhar's primordial towers and terraces in the burning moonlight of the waste, and of the terrible Cyclopean halls of Eblis, where, lured by glittering promises, each victim is compelled to wander in anguish for ever, his right hand upon his blazingly ignited and eternally burning heart, are triumphs of weird colouring which raise the book to a permanent place in English letters. No less notable are the three Episodes of Vathek, intended for insertion in the tale as narratives of Vathek's fellow-victims in Eblis' infernal halls, which remained unpublished throughout the author's lifetime and were discovered as recently as 1909 by the scholar Lewis Melville whilst collecting material for his Life and Letters of William Beckford. Beckford, however, lacks the essential mysticism which marks the acutest form of the weird; so that his tales have a certain knowing Latin hardness and clearness preclusive of sheer panic fright.
     But Beckford remained alone in his devotion to the Orient. Other writers, closer to the Gothic tradition and to European life in general, were content to follow more faithfully in the lead of Walpole. Among the countless producers of terror-literature in these times may be mentioned the Utopian economic theorist William Godwin, who followed his famous but non-supernatural Caleb Williams (1794) with the intendedly weird St. Leon (1799), in which the theme of the elixir of life, as developed by the imaginary secret order of Rosicrucians, is handled with ingeniousness if not with atmospheric convincingness. This element of Rosicrucianism, fostered by a wave of popular magical interest exemplified in the vogue of the charlatan Cagliostro and the publication of Francis Barrett's The Magus (1801), a curious and compendious treatise on occult principles and ceremonies, of which a reprint was made as lately as 1896, figures in Bulwer-Lytton and in many late Gothic novels, especially that remote and enfeebled posterity which straggled far down into the nineteenth century and was represented by George W. M. Reynolds' Faust and the Demon and Wagner, the Wehr-wolf. Caleb Williams, though non-supernatural, has many authentic touches of terror. It is the tale of a servant persecuted by a master whom he has found guilty of murder, and displays an invention and skill which have kept it alive in a fashion to this day. It was dramatised as The Iron Chest, and in that form was almost equally celebrated. Godwin, however, was too much the conscious teacher and prosaic man of thought to create a genuine weird masterpiece.
     His daughter, the wife of Shelley, was much more successful; and her inimitable Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus (1818) is one of the horror-classics of all time. Composed in competition with her husband, Lord Byron, and Dr. John William Polidori in an effort to prove supremacy in horror-making, Mrs. Shelley's Frankenstein was the only one of the rival narratives to be brought to an elaborate completion; and criticism has failed to prove that the best parts are due to Shelley rather than to her. The novel, somewhat tinged but scarcely marred by moral didacticism, tells of the artificial human being moulded from charnel fragments by Victor Frankenstein, a young Swiss medical student. Created by its designer in the mad pride of intellectuality, the monster possesses full intelligence but owns a hideously loathsome form. It is rejected by mankind, becomes embittered, and at length begins the successive murder of all whom young Frankenstein loves best, friends and family. It demands that Frankenstein create a wife for it; and when the student finally refuses in horror lest the world be populated with such monsters, it departs with a hideous threat ‘to be with him on his wedding night'. Upon that night the bride is strangled, and from that time on Frankenstein hunts down the monster, even into the wastes of the Arctic. In the end, whilst seeking shelter on the ship of the man who tells the story, Frankenstein himself is killed by the shocking object of his search and creation of his presumptuous pride. Some of the scenes in Frankenstein are unforgettable, as when the newly animated monster enters its creator's room, parts the curtains of his bed, and gazes at him in the yellow moonlight with watery eyes—if eyes they may be called. Mrs. Shelley wrote other novels, including the fairly notable Last Man; but never duplicated the success of her first effort. It has the true touch of cosmic fear, no matter how much the movement may lag in places. Dr. Polidori developed his competing idea as a long short story, The Vampyre; in which we behold a suave villain of the true Gothic or Byronic type, and encounter some excellent passages of stark fright, including a terrible nocturnal experience in a shunned Grecian wood.
     In this same period Sir Walter Scott frequently concerned himself with the weird, weaving it into many of his novels and poems, and sometimes producing such independent bits of narration as The Tapestried Chamber or Wandering Willie's Tale in Redgauntlet, in the latter of which the force of the spectral and the diabolic is enhanced by a grotesque homeliness of speech and atmosphere. In 1830 Scott published his Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft, which still forms one of our best compendia of European witch-lore. Washington Irving is another famous figure not unconnected with the weird; for though most of his ghosts are too whimsical and humorous to form genuinely spectral literature, a distinct inclination in this direction is to be noted in many of his productions. The German Student in Tales of a Traveller (1824) is a slyly concise and effective presentation of the old legend of the dead bride, whilst woven into the comic tissue of The Money-Diggers in the same volume is more than one hint of piratical apparitions in the realms which Captain Kidd once roamed. Thomas Moore also joined the ranks of the macabre artists in the poem Alciphron, which he later elaborated into the prose novel of The Epicurean (1827). Though merely relating the adventures of a young Athenian duped by the artifice of cunning Egyptian priests, Moore manages to infuse much genuine horror into his account of subterranean frights and wonders beneath the primordial temples of Memphis. De Quincey more than once revels in grotesque and arabesque terrors, though with a desultoriness and learned pomp which deny him the rank of specialist.
     This era likewise saw the rise of William Harrison Ainsworth, whose romantic novels teem with the eerie and the gruesome. Capt. Marryat, besides writing such short tales as The Werewolf, made a memorable contribution in The Phantom Ship (1839), founded on the legend of the Flying Dutchman, whose spectral and accursed vessel sails for ever near the Cape of Good Hope. Dickens now rises with occasional weird bits like The Signalman, a tale of ghostly warning conforming to a very common pattern and touched with a verisimilitude which allies it as much with the coming psychological school as with the dying Gothic school. At this time a wave of interest in spiritualistic charlatanry, mediumism, Hindoo theosophy, and such matters, much like that of the present day, was flourishing; so that the number of weird tales with a psychic or pseudo-scientific basis became very considerable. For a number of these the prolific and popular Lord Edward Bulwer-Lytton was responsible; and despite the large doses of turgid rhetoric and empty romanticism in his products, his success in the weaving of a certain kind of bizarre charm cannot be denied.
     The House and the Brain, which hints of Rosicrucianism and at a malign and deathless figure perhaps suggested by Louis XV's mysterious courtier St. Germain, yet survives as one of the best short haunted-house tales ever written. The novel Zanoni (1842) contains similar elements more elaborately handled, and introduces a vast unknown sphere of being pressing on our own world and guarded by a horrible Dweller of the Threshold who haunts those who try to enter and fail. Here we have a benign brotherhood kept alive from age to age till finally reduced to a single member, and as a hero an ancient Chaldaean sorcerer surviving in the pristine bloom of youth to perish on the guillotine of the French Revolution. Though full of the conventional spirit of romance, marred by a ponderous network of symbolic and didactic meanings, and left unconvincing through lack of perfect atmospheric realisation of the situations hinging on the spectral world, Zanoni is really an excellent performance as a romantic novel; and can be read with genuine interest today by the not too sophisticated reader. It is amusing to note that in describing an attempted initiation into the ancient brotherhood the author cannot escape using the stock Gothic castle of Walpolian lineage.
     In A Strange Story (1862) Bulwer-Lytton shews a marked improvement in the creation of weird images and moods. The novel, despite enormous length, a highly artificial plot bolstered up by opportune coincidences, and an atmosphere of homiletic pseudo-science designed to please the matter-of-fact and purposeful Victorian reader, is exceedingly effective as a narrative; evoking instantaneous and unflagging interest, and furnishing many potent—if somewhat melodramatic—tableaux and climaxes. Again we have the mysterious user of life's elixir in the person of the soulless magician Margrave, whose dark exploits stand out with dramatic vividness against the modern background of a quiet English town and of the Australian bush; and again we have shadowy intimations of a vast spectral world of the unknown in the very air about us—this time handled with much greater power and vitality than in Zanoni. One of the two great incantation passages, where the hero is driven by a luminous evil spirit to rise at night in his sleep, take a strange Egyptian wand, and evoke nameless presences in the haunted and mausoleum-facing pavilion of a famous Renaissance alchemist, truly stands among the major terror scenes of literature. Just enough is suggested, and just little enough is told. Unknown words are twice dictated to the sleep-walker, and as he repeats them the ground trembles, and all the dogs of the countryside begin to bay at half-seen amorphous shadows that stalk athwart the moonlight. When a third set of unknown words is prompted, the sleep-walker's spirit suddenly rebels at uttering them, as if the soul could recognise ultimate abysmal horrors concealed from the mind; and at last an apparition of an absent sweetheart and good angel breaks the malign spell. This fragment well illustrates how far Lord Lytton was capable of progressing beyond his usual pomp and stock romance toward that crystalline essence of artistic fear which belongs to the domain of poetry. In describing certain details of incantations, Lytton was greatly indebted to his amusingly serious occult studies, in the course of which he came in touch with that odd French scholar and cabbalist Alphonse-Louis Constant (Eliphas Lévi), who claimed to possess the secrets of ancient magic, and to have evoked the spectre of the old Grecian wizard Apollonius of Tyana, who lived in Nero's time.
     The romantic, semi-Gothic, quasi-moral tradition here represented was carried far down the nineteenth century by such authors as Joseph Sheridan LeFanu, Thomas Preskett Prest with his famous Varney, the Vampyre (1847), Wilkie Collins, the late Sir H. Rider Haggard (whose She is really remarkably good), Sir A. Conan Doyle, H. G. Wells, and Robert Louis Stevenson—the latter of whom, despite an atrocious tendency toward jaunty mannerisms, created permanent classics in Markheim, The Body-Snatcher, and Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Indeed, we may say that this school still survives; for to it clearly belong such of our contemporary horror-tales as specialise in events rather than atmospheric details, address the intellect rather than the impressionistic imagination, cultivate a luminous glamour rather than a malign tensity or psychological verisimilitude, and take a definite stand in sympathy with mankind and its welfare. It has its undeniable strength, and because of its human element commands a wider audience than does the sheer artistic nightmare. If not quite so potent as the latter, it is because a diluted product can never achieve the intensity of a concentrated essence.
     Quite alone both as a novel and as a piece of terror-literature stands the famous Wuthering Heights (1847) by Emily Brontë, with its mad vista of bleak, windswept Yorkshire moors and the violent, distorted lives they foster. Though primarily a tale of life, and of human passions in agony and conflict, its epically cosmic setting affords room for horror of the most spiritual sort. Heathcliff, the modified Byronic villain-hero, is a strange dark waif found in the streets as a small child and speaking only a strange gibberish till adopted by the family he ultimately ruins. That he is in truth a diabolic spirit rather than a human being is more than once suggested, and the unreal is further approached in the experience of the visitor who encounters a plaintive child-ghost at a bough-brushed upper window. Between Heathcliff and Catherine Earnshaw is a tie deeper and more terrible than human love. After her death he twice disturbs her grave, and is haunted by an impalpable presence which can be nothing less than her spirit. The spirit enters his life more and more, and at last he becomes confident of some imminent mystical reunion. He says he feels a strange change approaching, and ceases to take nourishment. At night he either walks abroad or opens the casement by his bed. When he dies the casement is still swinging open to the pouring rain, and a queer smile pervades the stiffened face. They bury him in a grave beside the mound he has haunted for eighteen years, and small shepherd boys say that he yet walks with his Catherine in the churchyard and on the moor when it rains. Their faces, too, are sometimes seen on rainy nights behind that upper casement at Wuthering Heights. Miss Brontë's eerie terror is no mere Gothic echo, but a tense expression of man's shuddering reaction to the unknown. In this respect, Wuthering Heights becomes the symbol of a literary transition, and marks the growth of a new and sounder school.

VI. Spectral Literature on the Continent

     On the Continent literary horror fared well. The celebrated short tales and novels of Ernst Theodor Wilhelm Hoffmann (1776–1822) are a byword for mellowness of background and maturity of form, though they incline to levity and extravagance, and lack the exalted moments of stark, breathless terror which a less sophisticated writer might have achieved. Generally they convey the grotesque rather than the terrible. Most artistic of all the Continental weird tales is the German classic Undine (1811), by Friedrich Heinrich Karl, Baron de la Motte Fouqué. In this story of a water-spirit who married a mortal and gained a human soul there is a delicate fineness of craftsmanship which makes it notable in any department of literature, and an easy naturalness which places it close to the genuine folk-myth. It is, in fact, derived from a tale told by the Renaissance physician and alchemist Paracelsus in his Treatise on Elemental Sprites.
     Undine, daughter of a powerful water-prince, was exchanged by her father as a small child for a fisherman's daughter, in order that she might acquire a soul by wedding a human being. Meeting the noble youth Huldbrand at the cottage of her foster-father by the sea at the edge of a haunted wood, she soon marries him, and accompanies him to his ancestral castle of Ringstetten. Huldbrand, however, eventually wearies of his wife's supernatural affiliations, and especially of the appearances of her uncle, the malicious woodland waterfall-spirit Kühleborn; a weariness increased by his growing affection for Bertalda, who turns out to be the fisherman's child for whom Undine was exchanged. At length, on a voyage down the Danube, he is provoked by some innocent act of his devoted wife to utter the angry words which consign her back to her supernatural element; from which she can, by the laws of her species, return only once—to kill him, whether she will or no, if ever he prove unfaithful to her memory. Later, when Huldbrand is about to be married to Bertalda, Undine returns for her sad duty, and bears his life away in tears. When he is buried among his fathers in the village churchyard a veiled, snow-white female figure appears among the mourners, but after the prayer is seen no more. In her place is seen a little silver spring, which murmurs its way almost completely around the new grave, and empties into a neighbouring lake. The villagers shew it to this day, and say that Undine and her Huldbrand are thus united in death. Many passages and atmospheric touches in this tale reveal Fouqué as an accomplished artist in the field of the macabre; especially the descriptions of the haunted wood with its gigantic snow-white man and various unnamed terrors, which occur early in the narrative.
     Not so well known as Undine, but remarkable for its convincing realism and freedom from Gothic stock devices, is the Amber Witch of Wilhelm Meinhold, another product of the German fantastic genius of the earlier nineteenth century. This tale, which is laid in the time of the Thirty Years' War, purports to be a clergyman's manuscript found in an old church at Coserow, and centres round the writer's daughter, Maria Schweidler, who is wrongly accused of witchcraft. She has found a deposit of amber which she keeps secret for various reasons, and the unexplained wealth obtained from this lends colour to the accusation; an accusation instigated by the malice of the wolf-hunting nobleman Wittich Appelmann, who has vainly pursued her with ignoble designs. The deeds of a real witch, who afterward comes to a horrible supernatural end in prison, are glibly imputed to the hapless Maria; and after a typical witchcraft trial with forced confessions under torture she is about to be burned at the stake when saved just in time by her lover, a noble youth from a neighbouring district. Meinhold's great strength is in his air of casual and realistic verisimilitude, which intensifies our suspense and sense of the unseen by half persuading us that the menacing events must somehow be either the truth or very close to the truth. Indeed, so thorough is this realism that a popular magazine once published the main points of The Amber Witch as an actual occurrence of the seventeenth century!
     In the present generation German horror-fiction is most notably represented by Hanns Heinz Ewers, who brings to bear on his dark conceptions an effective knowledge of modern psychology. Novels like The Sorcerer's Apprentice and Alraune, and short stories like The Spider, contain distinctive qualities which raise them to a classic level.
     But France as well as Germany has been active in the realm of weirdness. Victor Hugo, in such tales as Hans of Iceland, and Balzac, in The Wild Ass's Skin, Séraphîta, and Louis Lambert, both employ supernaturalism to a greater or less extent; though generally only as a means to some more human end, and without the sincere and daemonic intensity which characterises the born artist in shadows. It is in Théophile Gautier that we first seem to find an authentic French sense of the unreal world, and here there appears a spectral mastery which, though not continuously used, is recognisable at once as something alike genuine and profound. Short tales like Avatar, The Foot of the Mummy, and Clarimonde display glimpses of forbidden visits that allure, tantalise, and sometimes horrify; whilst the Egyptian visions evoked in One of Cleopatra's Nights are of the keenest and most expressive potency. Gautier captured the inmost soul of aeon-weighted Egypt, with its cryptic life and Cyclopean architecture, and uttered once and for all the eternal horror of its nether world of catacombs, where to the end of time millions of stiff, spiced corpses will stare up in the blackness with glassy eyes, awaiting some awesome and unrelatable summons. Gustave Flaubert ably continued the tradition of Gautier in orgies of poetic phantasy like The Temptation of St. Anthony, and but for a strong realistic bias might have been an arch-weaver of tapestried terrors. Later on we see the stream divide, producing strange poets and fantaisistes of the Symbolist and Decadent schools whose dark interests really centre more in abnormalities of human thought and instinct than in the actual supernatural, and subtle story-tellers whose thrills are quite directly derived from the night-black wells of cosmic unreality. Of the former class of artists in sin the illustrious poet Baudelaire, influenced vastly by Poe, is the supreme type; whilst the psychological novelist Joris-Karl Huysmans, a true child of the eighteen-nineties, is at once the summation and finale. The latter and purely narrative class is continued by Prosper Mérimée, whose Venus of Ille presents in terse and convincing prose the same ancient statue-bride theme which Thomas Moore cast in ballad form in The Ring.
     The horror-tales of the powerful and cynical Guy de Maupassant, written as his final madness gradually overtook him, present individualities of their own; being rather the morbid outpourings of a realistic mind in a pathological state than the healthy imaginative products of a vision naturally disposed toward phantasy and sensitive to the normal illusions of the unseen. Nevertheless they are of the keenest interest and poignancy; suggesting with marvellous force the imminence of nameless terrors, and the relentless dogging of an ill-starred individual by hideous and menacing representatives of the outer blackness. Of these stories The Horla is generally regarded as the masterpiece. Relating the advent to France of an invisible being who lives on water and milk, sways the minds of others, and seems to be the vanguard of a horde of extra-terrestrial organisms arrived on earth to subjugate and overwhelm mankind, this tense narrative is perhaps without a peer in its particular department; notwithstanding its indebtedness to a tale by the American Fitz-James O'Brien for details in describing the actual presence of the unseen monster. Other potently dark creations of de Maupassant are Who Knows?, The Spectre, He?, The Diary of a Madman, The White Wolf, On the River, and the grisly verses entitled Horror.
     The collaborators Erckmann-Chatrian enriched French literature with many spectral fancies like The Man-Wolf, in which a transmitted curse works toward its end in a traditional Gothic-castle setting. Their power of creating a shuddering midnight atmosphere was tremendous despite a tendency toward natural explanations and scientific wonders; and few short tales contain greater horror than The Invisible Eye, where a malignant old hag weaves nocturnal hypnotic spells which induce the successive occupants of a certain inn chamber to hang themselves on a cross-beam. The Owl's Ear and The Waters of Death are full of engulfing darkness and mystery, the latter embodying the familiar overgrown-spider theme so frequently employed by weird fictionists. Villiers de l'Isle-Adam likewise followed the macabre school; his Torture by Hope, the tale of a stake-condemned prisoner permitted to escape in order to feel the pangs of recapture, being held by some to constitute the most harrowing short story in literature. This type, however, is less a part of the weird tradition than a class peculiar to itself—the so-called conte cruel, in which the wrenching of the emotions is accomplished through dramatic tantalisations, frustrations, and gruesome physical horrors. Almost wholly devoted to this form is the living writer Maurice Level, whose very brief episodes have lent themselves so readily to theatrical adaptation in the thrillers of the Grand Guignol. As a matter of fact, the French genius is more naturally suited to this dark realism than to the suggestion of the unseen; since the latter process requires, for its best and most sympathetic development on a large scale, the inherent mysticism of the Northern mind.
     A very flourishing, though till recently quite hidden, branch of weird literature is that of the Jews, kept alive and nourished in obscurity by the sombre heritage of early Eastern magic, apocalyptic literature, and cabbalism. The Semitic mind, like the Celtic and Teutonic, seems to possess marked mystical inclinations; and the wealth of underground horror-lore surviving in ghettoes and synagogues must be much more considerable than is generally imagined. Cabbalism itself, so prominent during the Middle Ages, is a system of philosophy explaining the universe as emanations of the Deity, and involving the existence of strange spiritual realms and beings apart from the visible world, of which dark glimpses may be obtained through certain secret incantations. Its ritual is bound up with mystical interpretations of the Old Testament, and attributes an esoteric significance to each letter of the Hebrew alphabet—a circumstance which has imparted to Hebrew letters a sort of spectral glamour and potency in the popular literature of magic. Jewish folklore has preserved much of the terror and mystery of the past, and when more thoroughly studied is likely to exert considerable influence on weird fiction. The best examples of its literary use so far are the German novel The Golem, by Gustav Meyrink, and the drama The Dybbuk, by the Jewish writer using the pseudonym Ansky. The former, with its haunting shadowy suggestions of marvels and horrors just beyond reach, is laid in Prague, and describes with singular mastery that city's ancient ghetto with its spectral, peaked gables. The name is derived from a fabulous artificial giant supposed to be made and animated by mediaeval rabbis according to a certain cryptic formula. The Dybbuk, translated and produced in America in 1925, and more recently produced as an opera, describes with singular power the possession of a living body by the evil soul of a dead man. Both golems and dybbuks are fixed types, and serve as frequent ingredients of later Jewish tradition.

VII. Edgar Allan Poe

     In the eighteen-thirties occurred a literary dawn directly affecting not only the history of the weird tale, but that of short fiction as a whole; and indirectly moulding the trends and fortunes of a great European aesthetic school. It is our good fortune as Americans to be able to claim that dawn as our own, for it came in the person of our illustrious and unfortunate fellow-countryman Edgar Allan Poe. Poe's fame has been subject to curious undulations, and it is now a fashion amongst the advanced intelligentsia to minimise his importance both as an artist and as an influence; but it would be hard for any mature and reflective critic to deny the tremendous value of his work and the pervasive potency of his mind as an opener of artistic vistas. True, his type of outlook may have been anticipated; but it was he who first realised its possibilities and gave it supreme form and systematic expression. True also, that subsequent writers may have produced greater single tales than his; but again we must comprehend that it was only he who taught them by example and precept the art which they, having the way cleared for them and given an explicit guide, were perhaps able to carry to greater lengths. Whatever his limitations, Poe did that which no one else ever did or could have done; and to him we owe the modern horror-story in its final and perfected state.
     Before Poe the bulk of weird writers had worked largely in the dark; without an understanding of the psychological basis of the horror appeal, and hampered by more or less of conformity to certain empty literary conventions such as the happy ending, virtue rewarded, and in general a hollow moral didacticism, acceptance of popular standards and values, and striving of the author to obtrude his own emotions into the story and take sides with the partisans of the majority's artificial ideas. Poe, on the other hand, perceived the essential impersonality of the real artist; and knew that the function of creative fiction is merely to express and interpret events and sensations as they are, regardless of how they tend or what they prove—good or evil, attractive or repulsive, stimulating or depressing—with the author always acting as a vivid and detached chronicler rather than as a teacher, sympathiser, or vendor of opinion. He saw clearly that all phases of life and thought are equally eligible as subject-matter for the artist, and being inclined by temperament to strangeness and gloom, decided to be the interpreter of those powerful feeling, and frequent happenings which attend pain rather than pleasure, decay rather than growth, terror rather than tranquillity, and which are fundamentally either adverse or indifferent to the tastes and traditional outward sentiments of mankind, and to the health, sanity, and normal expansive welfare of the species.
     Poe's spectres thus acquired a convincing malignity possessed by none of their predecessors, and established a new standard of realism in the annals of literary horror. The impersonal and artistic intent, moreover, was aided by a scientific attitude not often found before; whereby Poe studied the human mind rather than the usages of Gothic fiction, and worked with an analytical knowledge of terror's true sources which doubled the force of his narratives and emancipated him from all the absurdities inherent in merely conventional shudder-coining. This example having been set, later authors were naturally forced to conform to it in order to compete at all; so that in this way a definite change began to affect the main stream of macabre writing. Poe, too, set a fashion in consummate craftsmanship; and although today some of his own work seems slightly melodramatic and unsophisticated, we can constantly trace his influence in such things as the maintenance of a single mood and achievement of a single impression in a tale, and the rigorous paring down of incidents to such as have a direct bearing on the plot and will figure prominently in the climax. Truly may it be said that Poe invented the short story in its present form. His elevation of disease, perversity, and decay to the level of artistically expressible themes was likewise infinitely far-reaching in effect; for avidly seized, sponsored, and intensified by his eminent French admirer Charles Pierre Baudelaire, it became the nucleus of the principal aesthetic movements in France, thus making Poe in a sense the father of the Decadents and the Symbolists.
     Poet and critic by nature and supreme attainment, logician and philosopher by taste and mannerism, Poe was by no means immune from defects and affectations. His pretence to profound and obscure scholarship, his blundering ventures in stilted and laboured pseudo-humour, and his often vitriolic outbursts of critical prejudice must all be recognised and forgiven. Beyond and above them, and dwarfing them to insignificance, was a master's vision of the terror that stalks about and within us, and the worm that writhes and slavers in the hideously close abyss. Penetrating to every festering horror in the gaily painted mockery called existence, and in the solemn masquerade called human thought and feelings that vision had power to project itself in blackly magical crystallisations and transmutations; till there bloomed in the sterile America of the 'thirties and 'forties such a moon-nourished garden of gorgeous poison fungi as not even the nether slope of Saturn might boast. Verses and tales alike sustain the burthen of cosmic panic. The raven whose noisome beak pierces the heart, the ghouls that toll iron bells in pestilential steeples, the vault of Ulalume in the black October night, the shocking spires and domes under the sea, the wild, weird clime that lieth, sublime, out of Space—out of Time—all these things and more leer at us amidst maniacal rattlings in the seething nightmare of the poetry. And in the prose there yawn open for us the very jaws of the pit—inconceivable abnormalities slyly hinted into a horrible half-knowledge by words whose innocence we scarcely doubt till the cracked tension of the speaker's hollow voice bids us fear their nameless implications; daemoniac patterns and presences slumbering noxiously till waked for one phobic instant into a shrieking revelation that cackles itself to sudden madness or explodes in memorable and cataclysmic echoes. A Witches' Sabbath of horror flinging off decorous robes is flashed before us—a sight the more monstrous because of the scientific skill with which every particular is marshalled and brought into an easy apparent relation to the known gruesomeness of material life.
     Poe's tales, of course, fall into several classes; some of which contain a purer essence of spiritual horror than others. The tales of logic and ratiocination, forerunners of the modern detective story, are not to be included at all in weird literature; whilst certain others, probably influenced considerably by Hoffmann, possess an extravagance which relegates them to the borderline of the grotesque. Still a third group deal with abnormal psychology and monomania in such a way as to express terror but not weirdness. A substantial residuum, however, represent the literature of supernatural horror in its acutest form; and give their author a permanent and unassailable place as deity and fountain-head of all modern diabolic fiction. Who can forget the terrible swollen ship poised on the billow-chasm's edge in MS. Found in a Bottle—the dark intimations of her unhallowed age and monstrous growth, her sinister crew of unseeing greybeards, and her frightful southward rush under full sail through the ice of the Antarctic night, sucked onward by some resistless devil-current toward a vortex of eldritch enlightenment which must end in destruction? Then there is the unutterable M. Valdemar, kept together by hypnotism for seven months after his death, and uttering frantic sounds but a moment before the breaking of the spell leaves him a nearly liquid mass of loathsome—of detestable putrescence. In the Narrative of A. Gordon Pym the voyagers reach first a strange south polar land of murderous savages where nothing is white and where vast rocky ravines have the form of titanic Egyptian letters spelling terrible primal arcana of earth; and thereafter a still more mysterious realm where everything is white, and where shrouded giants and snowy-plumed birds guard a cryptic cataract of mist which empties from immeasurable celestial heights into a torrid milky sea. Metzengerstein horrifies with its malign hints of a monstrous metempsychosis—the mad nobleman who burns the stable of his hereditary foe; the colossal unknown horse that issues from the blazing building after the owner has perished therein; the vanishing bit of ancient tapestry where was shewn the giant horse of the victim's ancestor in the Crusades; the madman's wild and constant riding on the great horse, and his fear and hatred of the steed; the meaningless prophecies that brood obscurely over the warring houses; and finally, the burning of the madman's palace and the death therein of the owner, borne helpless into the flames and up the vast staircases astride the beast he has ridden so strangely. Afterward the rising smoke of the ruins takes the form of a gigantic horse. The Man of the Crowd, telling of one who roams day and night to mingle with streams of people as if afraid to be alone, has quieter effects, but implies nothing less of cosmic fear. Poe's mind was never far from terror and decay, and we see in every tale, poem, and philosophical dialogue a tense eagerness to fathom unplumbed wells of night, to pierce the veil of death, and to reign in fancy as lord of the frightful mysteries of time and space.
     Certain of Poe's tales possess an almost absolute perfection of artistic form which makes them veritable beacon-lights in the province of the short story. Poe could, when he wished, give to his prose a richly poetic cast; employing that archaic and Orientalised style with jewelled phrase, quasi-Biblical repetition, and recurrent burthen so successfully used by later writers like Oscar Wilde and Lord Dunsany; and in the cases where he has done this we have an effect of lyrical phantasy almost narcotic in essence—an opium pageant of dream in the language of dream, with every unnatural colour and grotesque image bodied forth in a symphony of corresponding sound. The Masque of the Red Death, Silence—A Fable, and Shadow—A Parable are assuredly poems in every sense of the word save the metrical one, and owe as much of their power to aural cadence as to visual imagery. But it is in two of the less openly poetic tales, Ligeia and The Fall of the House of Usher—especially the latter—that one finds those very summits of artistry whereby Poe takes his place at the head of fictional miniaturists. Simple and straightforward in plot, both of these tales owe their supreme magic to the cunning development which appears in the selection and collocation of every least incident. Ligeia tells of a first wife of lofty and mysterious origin, who after death returns through a preternatural force of will to take possession of the body of a second wife; imposing even her physical appearance on the temporary reanimated corpse of her victim at the last moment. Despite a suspicion of prolixity and topheaviness, the narrative reaches its terrific climax with relentless power. Usher, whose superiority in detail and proportion is very marked, hints shudderingly of obscure life in inorganic things, and displays an abnormally linked trinity of entities at the end of a long and isolated family history—a brother, his twin sister, and their incredibly ancient house all sharing a single soul and meeting one common dissolution at the same moment.
     These bizarre conceptions, so awkward in unskilful hands, become under Poe's spell living and convincing terrors to haunt our nights; and all because the author understood so perfectly the very mechanics and physiology of fear and strangeness—the essential details to emphasise, the precise incongruities and conceits to select as preliminaries or concomitants to horror, the exact incidents and allusions to throw out innocently in advance as symbols or prefigurings of each major step toward the hideous denouement to come, the nice adjustments of cumulative force and the unerring accuracy in linkage of parts which make for faultless unity throughout and thunderous effectiveness at the climactic moment, the delicate nuances of scenic and landscape value to select in establishing and sustaining the desired mood and vitalising the desired illusion—principles of this kind, and dozens of obscurer ones too elusive to be described or even fully comprehended by any ordinary commentator. Melodrama and unsophistication there may be—we are told of one fastidious Frenchman who could not bear to read Poe except in Baudelaire's urbane and Gallically modulated translation—but all traces of such things are wholly overshadowed by a potent and inborn sense of the spectral, the morbid, and the horrible which gushed forth from every cell of the artist's creative mentality and stamped his macabre work with the ineffaceable mark of supreme genius. Poe's weird tales are alive in a manner that few others can ever hope to be.
     Like most fantaisistes, Poe excels in incidents and broad narrative effects rather than in character drawing. His typical protagonist is generally a dark, handsome, proud, melancholy, intellectual, highly sensitive, capricious, introspective, isolated, and sometimes slightly mad gentleman of ancient family and opulent circumstances; usually deeply learned in strange lore, and darkly ambitious of penetrating to forbidden secrets of the universe. Aside from a high-sounding name, this character obviously derives little from the early Gothic novel; for he is clearly neither the wooden hero nor the diabolical villain of Radcliffian or Ludovician romance. Indirectly, however, he does possess a sort of genealogical connexion; since his gloomy, ambitious, and anti-social qualities savour strongly of the typical Byronic hero, who in turn is definitely an offspring of the Gothic Manfreds, Montonis, and Ambrosios. More particular qualities appear to be derived from the psychology of Poe himself, who certainly possessed much of the depression, sensitiveness, mad aspiration, loneliness, and extravagant freakishness which he attributes to his haughty and solitary victims of Fate.

VIII. The Weird Tradition in America

     The public for whom Poe wrote, though grossly unappreciative of his art, was by no means unaccustomed to the horrors with which he dealt. America, besides inheriting the usual dark folklore of Europe, had an additional fund of weird associations to draw upon; so that spectral legends had already been recognised as fruitful subject-matter for literature. Charles Brockden Brown had achieved phenomenal fame with his Radcliffian romances, and Washington Irving's lighter treatment of eerie themes had quickly become classic. This additional fund proceeded, as Paul Elmer More has pointed out, from the keen spiritual and theological interests of the first colonists, plus the strange and forbidding nature of the scene into which they were plunged. The vast and gloomy virgin forests in whose perpetual twilight all terrors might well lurk; the hordes of coppery Indians whose strange, saturnine visages and violent customs hinted strongly at traces of infernal origin; the free rein given under the influence of Puritan theocracy to all manner of notions respecting man's relation to the stern and vengeful God of the Calvinists, and to the sulphureous Adversary of that God, about whom so much was thundered in the pulpits each Sunday; and the morbid introspection developed by an isolated backwoods life devoid of normal amusements and of the recreational mood, harassed by commands for theological self-examination, keyed to unnatural emotional repression, and forming above all a mere grim struggle for survival—all these things conspired to produce an environment in which the black whisperings of sinister grandams were heard far beyond the chimney corner, and in which tales of witchcraft and unbelievable secret monstrosities lingered long after the dread days of the Salem nightmare.
     Poe represents the newer, more disillusioned, and more technically finished of the weird schools that rose out of this propitious milieu. Another school—the tradition of moral values, gentle restraint, and mild, leisurely phantasy tinged more or less with the whimsical—was represented by another famous, misunderstood, and lonely figure in American letters—the shy and sensitive Nathaniel Hawthorne, scion of antique Salem and great-grandson of one of the bloodiest of the old witchcraft judges. In Hawthorne we have none of the violence, the daring, the high colouring, the intense dramatic sense, the cosmic malignity, and the undivided and impersonal artistry of Poe. Here, instead, is a gentle soul cramped by the Puritanism of early New England; shadowed and wistful, and grieved at an unmoral universe which everywhere transcends the conventional patterns thought by our forefathers to represent divine and immutable law. Evil, a very real force to Hawthorne, appears on every hand as a lurking and conquering adversary; and the visible world becomes in his fancy a theatre of infinite tragedy and woe, with unseen half-existent influences hovering over it and through it, battling for supremacy and moulding the destinies of the hapless mortals who form its vain and self-deluded population. The heritage of American weirdness was his to a most intense degree, and he saw a dismal throng of vague spectres behind the common phenomena of life; but he was not disinterested enough to value impressions, sensations, and beauties of narration for their own sake. He must needs weave his phantasy into some quietly melancholy fabric of didactic or allegorical cast, in which his meekly resigned cynicism may display with naive moral appraisal the perfidy of a human race which he cannot cease to cherish and mourn despite his insight into its hypocrisy. Supernatural horror, then, is never a primary object with Hawthorne; though its impulses were so deeply woven into his personality that he cannot help suggesting it with the force of genius when he calls upon the unreal world to illustrate the pensive sermon he wishes to preach.
     Hawthorne's intimations of the weird, always gentle, elusive, and restrained, may be traced throughout his work. The mood that produced them found one delightful vent in the Teutonised retelling of classic myths for children contained in A Wonder Book and Tanglewood Tales, and at other times exercised itself in casting a certain strangeness and intangible witchery or malevolence over events not meant to be actually supernatural; as in the macabre posthumous novel Dr. Grimshawe's Secret, which invests with a peculiar sort of repulsion a house existing to this day in Salem, and abutting on the ancient Charter Street Burying Ground. In The Marble Faun, whose design was sketched out in an Italian villa reputed to be haunted, a tremendous background of genuine phantasy and mystery palpitates just beyond the common reader's sight; and glimpses of fabulous blood in mortal veins are hinted at during the course of a romance which cannot help being interesting despite the persistent incubus of moral allegory, anti-Popery propaganda, and a Puritan prudery which has caused the late D. H. Lawrence to express a longing to treat the author in a highly undignified manner. Septimius Felton, a posthumous novel whose idea was to have been elaborated and incorporated into the unfinished Dolliver Romance, touches on the Elixir of Life in a more or less capable fashion; whilst the notes for a never-written tale to be called The Ancestral Footstep shew what Hawthorne would have done with an intensive treatment of an old English superstition—that of an ancient and accursed line whose members left footprints of blood as they walked—which appears incidentally in both Septimius Felton and Dr. Grimshawe's Secret.
     Many of Hawthorne's shorter tales exhibit weirdness, either of atmosphere or of incident, to a remarkable degree. Edward Randolph's Portrait, in Legends of the Province House, has its diabolic moments. The Minister's Black Veil (founded on an actual incident) and The Ambitious Guest imply much more than they state, whilst Ethan Brand—a fragment of a longer work never completed—rises to genuine heights of cosmic fear with its vignette of the wild hill country and the blazing, desolate lime-kilns, and its delineation of the Byronic unpardonable sinner, whose troubled life ends with a peal of fearful laughter in the night as he seeks rest amidst the flames of the furnace. Some of Hawthorne's notes tell of weird tales he would have written had he lived longer—an especially vivid plot being that concerning a baffling stranger who appeared now and then in public assemblies, and who was at last followed and found to come and go from a very ancient grave.
     But foremost as a finished, artistic unit among all our author's weird material is the famous and exquisitely wrought novel, The House of the Seven Gables, in which the relentless working out of an ancestral curse is developed with astonishing power against the sinister background of a very ancient Salem house—one of those peaked Gothic affairs which formed the first regular building-up of our New England coast towns, but which gave way after the seventeenth century to the more familiar gambrel-roofed or classic Georgian types now known as Colonial. Of these old gabled Gothic houses scarcely a dozen are to be seen today in their original condition throughout the United States, but one well known to Hawthorne still stands in Turner Street, Salem, and is pointed out with doubtful authority as the scene and inspiration of the romance. Such an edifice, with its spectral peaks, its clustered chimneys, its overhanging second story, its grotesque corner-brackets, and its diamond-paned lattice windows, is indeed an object well calculated to evoke sombre reflections; typifying as it does the dark Puritan age of concealed horror and witch-whispers which preceded the beauty, rationality, and spaciousness of the eighteenth century. Hawthorne saw many in his youth, and knew the black tales connected with some of them. He heard, too, many rumours of a curse upon his own line as the result of his great-grandfather's severity as a witchcraft judge in 1692.
     From this setting came the immortal tale—New England's greatest contribution to weird literature—and we can feel in an instant the authenticity of the atmosphere presented to us. Stealthy horror and disease lurk within the weather-blackened, moss-crusted, and elm-shadowed walls of the archaic dwelling so vividly displayed, and we grasp the brooding malignity of the place when we read that its builder—old Colonel Pyncheon—snatched the land with peculiar ruthlessness from its original settler, Matthew Maule, whom he condemned to the gallows as a wizard in the year of the panic. Maule died cursing old Pyncheon—God will give him blood to drink—and the waters of the old well on the seized land turned bitter. Maule's carpenter son consented to build the great gabled house for his father's triumphant enemy, but the old Colonel died strangely on the day of its dedication. Then followed generations of odd vicissitudes, with queer whispers about the dark powers of the Maules, and peculiar and sometimes terrible ends befalling the Pyncheons.
     The overshadowing malevolence of the ancient house—almost as alive as Poe's House of Usher, though in a subtler way—pervades the tale as a recurrent motif pervades an operatic tragedy; and when the main story is reached, we behold the modern Pyncheons in a pitiable state of decay. Poor old Hepzibah, the eccentric reduced gentlewoman; child-like, unfortunate Clifford, just released from undeserved imprisonment; sly and treacherous Judge Pyncheon, who is the old Colonel all over again—all these figures are tremendous symbols, and are well matched by the stunted vegetation and anaemic fowls in the garden. It was almost a pity to supply a fairly happy ending, with a union of sprightly Phoebe, cousin and last scion of the Pyncheons, to the prepossessing young man who turns out to be the last of the Maules. This union, presumably, ends the curse. Hawthorne avoids all violence of diction or movement, and keeps his implications of terror well in the background; but occasional glimpses amply serve to sustain the mood and redeem the work from pure allegorical aridity. Incidents like the bewitching of Alice Pyncheon in the early eighteenth century, and the spectral music of her harpsichord which precedes a death in the family—the latter a variant of an immemorial type of Aryan myth—link the action directly with the supernatural; whilst the dead nocturnal vigil of old Judge Pyncheon in the ancient parlour, with his frightfully ticking watch, is stark horror of the most poignant and genuine sort. The way in which the Judge's death is first adumbrated by the motions and sniffing of a strange cat outside the window, long before the fact is suspected either by the reader or by any of the characters, is a stroke of genius which Poe could not have surpassed. Later the strange cat watches intently outside that same window in the night and on the next day, for—something. It is clearly the psychopomp of primeval myth, fitted and adapted with infinite deftness to its latter-day setting.
     But Hawthorne left no well-defined literary posterity. His mood and attitude belonged to the age which closed with him, and it is the spirit of Poe—who so clearly and realistically understood the natural basis of the horror-appeal and the correct mechanics of its achievement—which survived and blossomed. Among the earliest of Poe's disciples may be reckoned the brilliant young Irishman Fitz-James O'Brien (1828–1862), who became naturalised as an American and perished honourably in the Civil War. It is he who gave us What Was It?, the first well-shaped short story of a tangible but invisible being, and the prototype of de Maupassant's Horla; he also who created the inimitable Diamond Lens, in which a young microscopist falls in love with a maiden of an infinitesimal world which he has discovered in a drop of water. O'Brien's early death undoubtedly deprived us of some masterful tales of strangeness and terror, though his genius was not, properly speaking, of the same titan quality which characterised Poe and Hawthorne.
     Closer to real greatness was the eccentric and saturnine journalist Ambrose Bierce, born in 1842; who likewise entered the Civil War, but survived to write some immortal tales and to disappear in 1913 in as great a cloud of mystery as any he ever evoked from his nightmare fancy. Bierce was a satirist and pamphleteer of note, but the bulk of his artistic reputation must rest upon his grim and savage short stories; a large number of which deal with the Civil War and form the most vivid and realistic expression which that conflict has yet received in fiction. Virtually all of Bierce's tales are tales of horror; and whilst many of them treat only of the physical and psychological horrors within Nature, a substantial proportion admit the malignly supernatural and form a leading element in America's fund of weird literature. Mr. Samuel Loveman, a living poet and critic who was personally acquainted with Bierce, thus sums up the genius of the great shadow-maker in the preface to some of his letters

     In Bierce, the evocation of horror becomes for the first time, not so much the prescription or perversion of Poe and Maupassant, but an atmosphere definite and uncannily precise. Words, so simple that one would be prone to ascribe them to the limitations of a literary hack, take on an unholy horror, a new and unguessed transformation. In Poe one finds it a tour de force, in Maupassant a nervous engagement of the flagellated climax. To Bierce, simply and sincerely, diabolism held in its tormented depth, a legitimate and reliant means to the end. Yet a tacit confirmation with Nature is in every instance insisted upon.
     In ‘The Death of Halpin Frayser', flowers, verdure, and the boughs and leaves of trees are magnificently placed as an opposing foil to unnatural malignity. Not the accustomed golden world, but a world pervaded with the mystery of blue and the breathless recalcitrance of dreams, is Bierce's. Yet, curiously, inhumanity is not altogether absent.
     The inhumanity mentioned by Mr. Loveman finds vent in a rare strain of sardonic comedy and graveyard humour, and a kind of delight in images of cruelty and tantalising disappointment. The former quality is well illustrated by some of the subtitles in the darker narratives; such as One does not always eat what is on the table, describing a body laid out for a coroner's inquest, and A man though naked may be in rags, referring to a frightfully mangled corpse.
     Bierce's work is in general somewhat uneven. Many of the stories are obviously mechanical, and marred by a jaunty and commonplacely artificial style derived from journalistic models; but the grim malevolence stalking through all of them is unmistakable, and several stand out as permanent mountain-peaks of American weird writing. The Death of Halpin Frayser, called by Frederic Taber Cooper the most fiendishly ghastly tale in the literature of the Anglo-Saxon race, tells of a body skulking by night without a soul in a weird and horribly ensanguined wood, and of a man beset by ancestral memories who met death at the claws of that which had been his fervently loved mother. The Damned Thing, frequently copied in popular anthologies, chronicles the hideous devastations of an invisible entity that waddles and flounders on the hills and in the wheatfields by night and day. The Suitable Surroundings evokes with singular subtlety yet apparent simplicity a piercing sense of the terror which may reside in the written word. In the story the weird author Colston says to his friend Marsh, You are brave enough to read me in a street-car, but—in a deserted house—alone—in the forest—at night! Bah! I have a manuscript in my pocket that would kill you! Marsh reads the manuscript in the suitable surroundings—and it does kill him. The Middle Toe of the Right Foot is clumsily developed, but has a powerful climax. A man named Manton has horribly killed his two children and his wife, the latter of whom lacked the middle toe of the right foot. Ten years later he returns much altered to the neighbourhood; and, being secretly recognised, is provoked into a bowie-knife duel in the dark, to be held in the now abandoned house where his crime was committed. When the moment of the duel arrives a trick is played upon him; and he is left without an antagonist, shut in a night-black ground floor room of the reputedly haunted edifice, with the thick dust of a decade on every hand. No knife is drawn against him, for only a thorough scare is intended; but on the next day he is found crouched in a corner with distorted face, dead of sheer fright at something he has seen. The only clue visible to the discoverers is one having terrible implications In the dust of years that lay thick upon the floor—leading from the door by which they had entered, straight across the room to within a yard of Manton's crouching corpse—were three parallel lines of footprints—light but definite impressions of bare feet, the outer ones those of small children, the inner a woman's. From the point at which they ended they did not return; they pointed all one way. And, of course, the woman's prints shewed a lack of the middle toe of the right foot. The Spook House, told with a severely homely air of journalistic verisimilitude, conveys terrible hints of shocking mystery. In 1858 an entire family of seven persons disappears suddenly and unaccountably from a plantation house in eastern Kentucky, leaving all its possessions untouched—furniture, clothing, food supplies, horses, cattle, and slaves. About a year later two men of high standing are forced by a storm to take shelter in the deserted dwelling, and in so doing stumble into a strange subterranean room lit by an unaccountable greenish light and having an iron door which cannot be opened from within. In this room lie the decayed corpses of all the missing family; and as one of the discoverers rushes forward to embrace a body he seems to recognise, the other is so overpowered by a strange foetor that he accidentally shuts his companion in the vault and loses consciousness. Recovering his senses six weeks later, the survivor is unable to find the hidden room; and the house is burned during the Civil War. The imprisoned discoverer is never seen or heard of again.
     Bierce seldom realises the atmospheric possibilities of his themes as vividly as Poe; and much of his work contains a certain touch of naiveté, prosaic angularity, or early-American provincialism which contrasts somewhat with the efforts of later horror-masters. Nevertheless the genuineness and artistry of his dark intimations are always unmistakable, so that his greatness is in no danger of eclipse. As arranged in his definitively collected works, Bierce's weird tales occur mainly in two volumes, Can Such Things Be? and In the Midst of Life. The former, indeed, is almost wholly given over to the supernatural.
     Much of the best in American horror-literature has come from pens not mainly devoted to that medium. Oliver Wendell Holmes's historic Elsie Venner suggests with admirable restraint an unnatural ophidian element in a young woman pre-natally influenced, and sustains the atmosphere with finely discriminating landscape touches. In The Turn of the Screw Henry James triumphs over his inevitable pomposity and prolixity sufficiently well to create a truly potent air of sinister menace; depicting the hideous influence of two dead and evil servants, Peter Quint and the governess Miss Jessel, over a small boy and girl who had been under their care. James is perhaps too diffuse, too unctuously urbane, and too much addicted to subtleties of speech to realise fully all the wild and devastating horror in his situations; but for all that there is a rare and mounting tide of fright, culminating in the death of the little boy, which gives the novelette a permanent place in its special class.
     F. Marion Crawford produced several weird tales of varying quality, now collected in a volume entitled Wandering Ghosts. For the Blood Is the Life touches powerfully on a case of moon-cursed vampirism near an ancient tower on the rocks of the lonely South Italian sea-coast. The Dead Smile treats of family horrors in an old house and an ancestral vault in Ireland, and introduces the banshee with considerable force. The Upper Berth, however, is Crawford's weird masterpiece; and is one of the most tremendous horror-stories in all literature. In this tale of a suicide-haunted stateroom such things as the spectral salt-water dampness, the strangely open porthole, and the nightmare struggle with the nameless object are handled with incomparable dexterity.
     Very genuine, though not without the typical mannered extravagance of the eighteen-nineties, is the strain of horror in the early work of Robert W. Chambers, since renowned for products of a very different quality. The King in Yellow, a series of vaguely connected short stories having as a background a monstrous and suppressed book whose perusal brings fright, madness, and spectral tragedy, really achieves notable heights of cosmic fear in spite of uneven interest and a somewhat trivial and affected cultivation of the Gallic studio atmosphere made popular by Du Maurier's Trilby. The most powerful of its tales, perhaps, is The Yellow Sign, in which is introduced a silent and terrible churchyard watchman with a face like a puffy grave-worm's. A boy, describing a tussle he has had with this creature, shivers and sickens as he relates a certain detail. Well, sir, it's Gawd's truth that when I 'it 'im 'e grabbed me wrists, sir, and when I twisted 'is soft, mushy fist one of 'is fingers come off in me 'and. An artist, who after seeing him has shared with another a strange dream of a nocturnal hearse, is shocked by the voice with which the watchman accosts him. The fellow emits a muttering sound that fills the head like thick oily smoke from a fat-rendering vat or an odour of noisome decay. What he mumbles is merely this Have you found the Yellow Sign?
     A weirdly hieroglyphed onyx talisman, picked up in the street by the sharer of his dream, is shortly given the artist; and after stumbling queerly upon the hellish and forbidden book of horrors the two learn, among other hideous things which no sane mortal should know, that this talisman is indeed the nameless Yellow Sign handed down from the accursed cult of Hastur—from primordial Carcosa, whereof the volume treats, and some nightmare memory of which seems to lurk latent and ominous at the back of all men's minds. Soon they hear the rumbling of the black-plumed hearse driven by the flabby and corpse-faced watchman. He enters the night-shrouded house in quest of the Yellow Sign, all bolts and bars rotting at his touch. And when the people rush in, drawn by a scream that no human throat could utter, they find three forms on the floor—two dead and one dying. One of the dead shapes is far gone in decay. It is the churchyard watchman, and the doctor exclaims, That man must have been dead for months. It is worth observing that the author derives most of the names and allusions connected with his eldritch land of primal memory from the tales of Ambrose Bierce. Other early works of Mr. Chambers displaying the outré and macabre element are The Maker of Moons and In Search of the Unknown. One cannot help regretting that he did not further develop a vein in which he could so easily have become a recognised master.
     Horror material of authentic force may be found in the work of the New England realist Mary E. Wilkins; whose volume of short tales, The Wind in the Rose-Bush, contains a number of noteworthy achievements. In The Shadows on the Wall we are shewn with consummate skill the response of a staid New England household to uncanny tragedy; and the sourceless shadow of the poisoned brother well prepares us for the climactic moment when the shadow of the secret murderer, who has killed himself in a neighbouring city, suddenly appears beside it. Charlotte Perkins Gilman, in The Yellow Wall Paper, rises to a classic level in subtly delineating the madness which crawls over a woman dwelling in the hideously papered room where a madwoman was once confined.
     In The Dead Valley the eminent architect and mediaevalist Ralph Adams Cram achieves a memorably potent degree of vague regional horror through subtleties of atmosphere and description.
     Still further carrying on our spectral tradition is the gifted and versatile humourist Irvin S. Cobb, whose work both early and recent contains some finely weird specimens. Fishhead, an early achievement, is banefully effective in its portrayal of unnatural affinities between a hybrid idiot and the strange fish of an isolated lake, which at the last avenge their biped kinsman's murder. 
     Extremely high in artistic stature is the novel The Dark Chamber (1927), by the late Leonard Cline. This is the tale of a man who—with the characteristic ambition of the Gothic or Byronic hero-villain—seeks to defy Nature and recapture every moment of his past life through the abnormal stimulation of memory. To this end he employs endless notes, records, mnemonic objects, and pictures—and finally odours, music, and exotic drugs. At last his ambition goes beyond his personal life and reaches toward the black abysses of hereditary memory—even back to pre-human days amidst the steaming swamps of the Carboniferous age, and to still more unimaginable deeps of primal time and entity. He calls for madder music and takes stronger drugs, and finally his great dog grows oddly afraid of him. A noxious animal stench encompasses him, and he grows vacant-faced and sub-human. In the end he takes to the woods, howling at night beneath windows. He is finally found in a thicket, mangled to death. Beside him is the mangled corpse of his dog. They have killed each other. The atmosphere of this novel is malevolently potent, much attention being paid to the central figure's sinister home and household.
     A less subtle and well-balanced but nevertheless highly effective creation is Herbert S. Gorman's novel, The Place Called Dagon, which relates the dark history of a western Massachusetts backwater where the descendants of refugees from the Salem witchcraft still keep alive the morbid and degenerate horrors of the Black Sabbat.
     Sinister House, by Leland Hall, has touches of magnificent atmosphere but is marred by a somewhat mediocre romanticism.
     Very notable in their way are some of the weird conceptions of the novelist and short-story writer Edward Lucas White, most of whose themes arise from actual dreams. The Song of the Sirens has a very pervasive strangeness, while such things as Lukundoo and The Snout rouse darker apprehensions. Mr. White imparts a very peculiar quality to his tales—an oblique sort of glamour which has its own distinctive type of convincingness.
     Of younger Americans, none strikes the note of cosmic terror so well as the California poet, artist, and fictionist Clark Ashton Smith, whose bizarre writings, drawings, paintings, and stories are the delight of a sensitive few. Mr. Smith has for his background a universe of remote and paralysing fright—jungles of poisonous and iridescent blossoms on the moons of Saturn, evil and grotesque temples in Atlantis, Lemuria, and forgotten elder worlds, and dank morasses of spotted death-fungi in spectral countries beyond earth's rim. His longest and most ambitious poem, The Hashish-Eater, is in pentameter blank verse; and opens up chaotic and incredible vistas of kaleidoscopic nightmare in the spaces between the stars. In sheer daemonic strangeness and fertility of conception, Mr. Smith is perhaps unexcelled by any other writer dead or living. Who else has seen such gorgeous, luxuriant, and feverishly distorted visions of infinite spheres and multiple dimensions and lived to tell the tale? His short stories deal powerfully with other galaxies, worlds, and dimensions, as well as with strange regions and aeons on the earth. He tells of primal Hyperborea and its black amorphous god Tsathoggua; of the lost continent Zothique, and of the fabulous, vampire-curst land of Averoigne in mediaeval France. Some of Mr. Smith's best work can be found in the brochure entitled The Double Shadow and Other Fantasies (1933).

IX. The Weird Tradition in the British Isles

     Recent British literature, besides including the three or four greatest fantaisistes of the present age, has been gratifyingly fertile in the element of the weird. Rudyard Kipling has often approached it; and has, despite the omnipresent mannerisms, handled it with indubitable mastery in such tales as The Phantom 'Rickshaw,  ‘The Finest Story in the World' , The Recrudescence of Imray, and The Mark of the Beast. This latter is of particular poignancy; the pictures of the naked leper-priest who mewed like an otter, of the spots which appeared on the chest of the man that priest cursed, of the growing carnivorousness of the victim and of the fear which horses began to display toward him, and of the eventually half-accomplished transformation of that victim into a leopard, being things which no reader is ever likely to forget. The final defeat of the malignant sorcery does not impair the force of the tale or the validity of its mystery.
     Lafcadio Hearn, strange, wandering, and exotic, departs still farther from the realm of the real; and with the supreme artistry of a sensitive poet weaves phantasies impossible to an author of the solid roast-beef type. His Fantastics, written in America, contains some of the most impressive ghoulishness in all literature; whilst his Kwaidan, written in Japan, crystallises with matchless skill and delicacy the eerie lore and whispered legends of that richly colourful nation. Still more of Hearn's weird wizardry of language is shewn in some of his translations from the French, especially from Gautier and Flaubert. His version of the latter's Temptation of St. Anthony is a classic of fevered and riotous imagery clad in the magic of singing words.
     Oscar Wilde may likewise be given a place amongst weird writers, both for certain of his exquisite fairy tales, and for his vivid Picture of Dorian Gray, in which a marvellous portrait for years assumes the duty of ageing and coarsening instead of its original, who meanwhile plunges into every excess of vice and crime without the outward loss of youth, beauty, and freshness. There is a sudden and potent climax when Dorian Gray, at last become a murderer, seeks to destroy the painting whose changes testify to his moral degeneracy. He stabs it with a knife, and a hideous cry and crash are heard; but when the servants enter they find it in all its pristine loveliness. Lying on the floor was a dead man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart. He was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage. It was not till they had examined the rings that they recognised who it was.
     Matthew Phipps Shiel, author of many weird, grotesque, and adventurous novels and tales, occasionally attains a high level of horrific magic. Xélucha is a noxiously hideous fragment, but is excelled by Mr. Shiel's undoubted masterpiece, The House of Sounds, floridly written in the yellow 'nineties, and re-cast with more artistic restraint in the early twentieth century. This story, in final form, deserves a place among the foremost things of its kind. It tells of a creeping horror and menace trickling down the centuries on a sub-arctic island off the coast of Norway; where, amidst the sweep of daemon winds and the ceaseless din of hellish waves and cataracts, a vengeful dead man built a brazen tower of terror. It is vaguely like, yet infinitely unlike, Poe's Fall of the House of Usher. In the novel The Purple Cloud Mr. Shiel describes with tremendous power a curse which came out of the arctic to destroy mankind, and which for a time appears to have left but a single inhabitant on our planet. The sensations of this lone survivor as he realises his position, and roams through the corpse-littered and treasure-strown cities of the world as their absolute master, are delivered with a skill and artistry falling little short of actual majesty. Unfortunately the second half of the book, with its conventionally romantic element, involves a distinct letdown.
     Better known than Shiel is the ingenious Bram Stoker, who created many starkly horrific conceptions in a series of novels whose poor technique sadly impairs their net effect. The Lair of the White Worm, dealing with a gigantic primitive entity that lurks in a vault beneath an ancient castle, utterly ruins a magnificent idea by a development almost infantile. The Jewel of Seven Stars, touching on a strange Egyptian resurrection, is less crudely written. But best of all is the famous Dracula, which has become almost the standard modern exploitation of the frightful vampire myth. Count Dracula, a vampire, dwells in a horrible castle in the Carpathians; but finally migrates to England with the design of populating the country with fellow vampires. How an Englishman fares within Dracula's stronghold of terrors, and how the dead fiend's plot for domination is at last defeated, are elements which unite to form a tale now justly assigned a permanent place in English letters. Dracula evoked many similar novels of supernatural horror, among which the best are perhaps The Beetle, by Richard Marsh, Brood of the Witch-Queen, by Sax Rohmer (Arthur Sarsfield Ward), and The Door of the Unreal, by Gerald Biss. The latter handles quite dexterously the standard werewolf superstition. Much subtler and more artistic, and told with singular skill through the juxtaposed narratives of the several characters, is the novel Cold Harbour, by Francis Brett Young, in which an ancient house of strange malignancy is powerfully delineated. The mocking and well-nigh omnipotent fiend Humphrey Furnival holds echoes of the Manfred- Montoni type of early Gothic villain, but is redeemed from triteness by many clever individualities. Only the slight diffuseness of explanation at the close, and the somewhat too free use of divination as a plot factor, keep this tale from approaching absolute perfection.
     In the novel Witch Wood John Buchan depicts with tremendous force a survival of the evil Sabbat in a lonely district of Scotland. The description of the black forest with the evil stone, and of the terrible cosmic adumbrations when the horror is finally extirpated, will repay one for wading through the very gradual action and plethora of Scottish dialect. Some of Mr. Buchan's short stories are also extremely vivid in their spectral intimations; The Green Wildebeest, a tale of African witchcraft, The Wind in the Portico, with its awakening of dead Britanno-Roman horrors, and Skule Skerry, with its touches of sub-arctic fright, being especially remarkable.
     Clemence Housman, in the brief novelette The Were-wolf, attains a high degree of gruesome tension and achieves to some extent the atmosphere of authentic folklore. In The Elixir of Life Arthur Ransome attains some darkly excellent effects despite a general naiveté of plot, while H. B. Drake's The Shadowy Thing summons up strange and terrible vistas. George Macdonald's Lilith has a compelling bizarrerie all its own; the first and simpler of the two versions being perhaps the more effective.
     Deserving of distinguished notice as a forceful craftsman to whom an unseen mystic world is ever a close and vital reality is the poet Walter de la Mare, whose haunting verse and exquisite prose alike bear consistent traces of a strange vision reaching deeply into veiled spheres of beauty and terrible and forbidden dimensions of being. In the novel The Return we see the soul of a dead man reach out of its grave of two centuries and fasten itself upon the flesh of the living, so that even the face of the victim becomes that which had long ago returned to dust. Of the shorter tales, of which several volumes exist, many are unforgettable for their command of fear's and sorcery's darkest ramifications; notably Seaton's Aunt, in which there lowers a noxious background of malignant vampirism; The Tree, which tells of a frightful vegetable growth in the yard of a starving artist; Out of the Deep, wherein we are given leave to imagine what thing answered the summons of a dying wastrel in a dark lonely house when he pulled a long-feared bell-cord in the attic chamber of his dread-haunted boyhood; A Recluse, which hints at what sent a chance guest flying from a house in the night; Mr. Kempe, which shews us a mad clerical hermit in quest of the human soul, dwelling in a frightful sea-cliff region beside an archaic abandoned chapel; and All-Hallows, a glimpse of daemoniac forces besieging a lonely mediaeval church and miraculously restoring the rotting masonry. De la Mare does not make fear the sole or even the dominant element of most of his tales, being apparently more interested in the subtleties of character involved. Occasionally he sinks to sheer whimsical phantasy of the Barrie order. Still, he is among the very few to whom unreality is a vivid, living presence; and as such he is able to put into his occasional fear-studies a keen potency which only a rare master can achieve. His poem The Listeners restores the Gothic shudder to modern verse.
     The weird short story has fared well of late, an important contributor being the versatile E. F. Benson, whose The Man Who Went Too Far breathes whisperingly of a house at the edge of a dark wood, and of Pan's hoof-mark on the breast of a dead man. Mr. Benson's volume, Visible and Invisible, contains several stories of singular power; notably Negotium Perambulans, whose unfolding reveals an abnormal monster from an ancient ecclesiastical panel which performs an act of miraculous vengeance in a lonely village on the Cornish coast, and The Horror-Horn, through which lopes a terrible half-human survival dwelling on unvisited Alpine peaks. The Face, in another collection, is lethally potent in its relentless aura of doom. H. R. Wakefield, in his collections They Return at Evening and Others Who Return, manages now and then to achieve great heights of horror despite a vitiating air of sophistication. The most notable stories are The Red Lodge with its slimy aqueous evil, ‘He Cometh and He Passeth By', ‘And He Shall Sing . . .', The Cairn, ‘Look Up There!', Blind Man's Buff, and that bit of lurking millennial horror, The Seventeenth Hole at Duncaster. Mention has been made of the weird work of H. G. Wells and A. Conan Doyle. The former, in The Ghost of Fear, reaches a very high level; while all the items in Thirty Strange Stories have strong fantastic implications. Doyle now and then struck a powerfully spectral note, as in The Captain of the ‘Pole-Star' , a tale of arctic ghostliness, and Lot No. 249, wherein the reanimated mummy theme is used with more than ordinary skill. Hugh Walpole, of the same family as the founder of Gothic fiction, has sometimes approached the bizarre with much success; his short story Mrs. Lunt carrying a very poignant shudder. John Metcalfe, in the collection published as The Smoking Leg, attains now and then a rare pitch of potency; the tale entitled The Bad Lands containing graduations of horror that strongly savour of genius. More whimsical and inclined toward the amiable and innocuous phantasy of Sir J. M. Barrie are the short tales of E. M. Forster, grouped under the title of The Celestial Omnibus. Of these only one, dealing with a glimpse of Pan and his aura of fright, may be said to hold the true element of cosmic horror. Mrs. H. D. Everett, though adhering to very old and conventional models, occasionally reaches singular heights of spiritual terror in her collection of short stories. L. P. Hartley is notable for his incisive and extremely ghastly tale, A Visitor from Down Under. May Sinclair's Uncanny Stories contain more of traditional occultism than of that creative treatment of fear which marks mastery in this field, and are inclined to lay more stress on human emotions and psychological delving than upon the stark phenomena of a cosmos utterly unreal. It may be well to remark here that occult believers are probably less effective than materialists in delineating the spectral and the fantastic, since to them the phantom world is so commonplace a reality that they tend to refer to it with less awe, remoteness, and impressiveness than do those who see in it an absolute and stupendous violation of the natural order.
     Of rather uneven stylistic quality, but vast occasional power in its suggestion of lurking worlds and beings behind the ordinary surface of life, is the work of William Hope Hodgson, known today far less than it deserves to be. Despite a tendency toward conventionally sentimental conceptions of the universe, and of man's relation to it and to his fellows, Mr. Hodgson is perhaps second only to Algernon Blackwood in his serious treatment of unreality. Few can equal him in adumbrating the nearness of nameless forces and monstrous besieging entities through casual hints and insignificant details, or in conveying feelings of the spectral and the abnormal in connexion with regions or buildings.
     In The Boats of the Glen Carrig (1907) we are shewn a variety of malign marvels and accursed unknown lands as encountered by the survivors of a sunken ship. The brooding menace in the earlier parts of the book is impossible to surpass, though a letdown in the direction of ordinary romance and adventure occurs toward the end. An inaccurate and pseudo-romantic attempt to reproduce eighteenth-century prose detracts from the general effect, but the really profound nautical erudition everywhere displayed is a compensating factor.
     The House on the Borderland (1908)—perhaps the greatest of all Mr. Hodgson's works—tells of a lonely and evilly regarded house in Ireland which forms a focus for hideous other-world forces and sustains a siege by blasphemous hybrid anomalies from a hidden abyss below. The wanderings of the narrator's spirit through limitless light-years of cosmic space and kalpas of eternity, and its witnessing of the solar system's final destruction, constitute something almost unique in standard literature. And everywhere there is manifest the author's power to suggest vague, ambushed horrors in natural scenery. But for a few touches of commonplace sentimentality this book would be a classic of the first water.
     The Ghost Pirates (1909), regarded by Mr. Hodgson as rounding out a trilogy with the two previously mentioned works, is a powerful account of a doomed and haunted ship on its last voyage, and of the terrible sea-devils (of quasi-human aspect, and perhaps the spirits of bygone buccaneers) that besiege it and finally drag it down to an unknown fate. With its command of maritime knowledge, and its clever selection of hints and incidents suggestive of latent horrors in Nature, this book at times reaches enviable peaks of power.
     The Night Land (1912) is a long-extended (583 pp.) tale of the earth's infinitely remote future—billions of billions of years ahead, after the death of the sun. It is told in a rather clumsy fashion, as the dreams of a man in the seventeenth century, whose mind merges with its own future incarnation; and is seriously marred by painful verboseness, repetitiousness, artificial and nauseously sticky romantic sentimentality, and an attempt at archaic language even more grotesque and absurd than that in Glen Carrig.
     Allowing for all its faults, it is yet one of the most potent pieces of macabre imagination ever written. The picture of a night-black, dead planet, with the remains of the human race concentrated in a stupendously vast metal pyramid and besieged by monstrous, hybrid, and altogether unknown forces of the darkness, is something that no reader can ever forget. Shapes and entities of an altogether non-human and inconceivable sort—the prowlers of the black, man-forsaken, and unexplored world outside the pyramid—are suggested and partly described with ineffable potency; while the night-bound landscape with its chasms and slopes and dying volcanism takes on an almost sentient terror beneath the author's touch.
     Midway in the book the central figure ventures outside the pyramid on a quest through death-haunted realms untrod by man for millions of years—and in his slow, minutely described, day-by-day progress over unthinkable leagues of immemorial blackness there is a sense of cosmic alienage, breathless mystery, and terrified expectancy unrivalled in the whole range of literature. The last quarter of the book drags woefully, but fails to spoil the tremendous power of the whole.
     Mr. Hodgson's later volume, Carnacki, the Ghost-Finder, consists of several longish short stories published many years before in magazines. In quality it falls conspicuously below the level of the other books. We here find a more or less conventional stock figure of the infallible detective type—the progeny of M. Dupin and Sherlock Holmes, and the close kin of Algernon Blackwood's John Silence—moving through scenes and events badly marred by an atmosphere of professional occultism. A few of the episodes, however, are of undeniable power; and afford glimpses of the peculiar genius characteristic of the author.
     Naturally it is impossible in a brief sketch to trace out all the classic modern uses of the terror element. The ingredient must of necessity enter into all work both prose and verse treating broadly of life; and we are therefore not surprised to find a share in such writers as the poet Browning, whose Childe Roland to the Dark Tower Came  is instinct with hideous menace, or the novelist Joseph Conrad, who often wrote of the dark secrets within the sea, and of the daemoniac driving power of Fate as influencing the lives of lonely and maniacally resolute men. Its trail is one of infinite ramifications; but we must here confine ourselves to its appearance in a relatively unmixed state, where it determines and dominates the work of art containing it.
     Somewhat separate from the main British stream is that current of weirdness in Irish literature which came to the fore in the Celtic Renaissance of the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Ghost and fairy lore have always been of great prominence in Ireland, and for over an hundred years have been recorded by a line of such faithful transcribers and translators as William Carleton, T. Crofton Croker, Lady Wilde—mother of Oscar Wilde—Douglas Hyde, and W. B. Yeats. Brought to notice by the modern movement, this body of myth has been carefully collected and studied; and its salient features reproduced in the work of later figures like Yeats, J. M. Synge, A. E., Lady Gregory, Padraic Colum, James Stephens, and their colleagues.
     Whilst on the whole more whimsically fantastic than terrible, such folklore and its consciously artistic counterparts contain much that falls truly within the domain of cosmic horror. Tales of burials in sunken churches beneath haunted lakes, accounts of death-heralding banshees and sinister changelings, ballads of spectres and the unholy creatures of the raths—all these have their poignant and definite shivers, and mark a strong and distinctive element in weird literature. Despite homely grotesqueness and absolute naiveté, there is genuine nightmare in the class of narrative represented by the yarn of Teig O'Kane, who in punishment for his wild life was ridden all night by a hideous corpse that demanded burial and drove him from churchyard to churchyard as the dead rose up loathsomely in each one and refused to accommodate the newcomer with a berth. Yeats, undoubtedly the greatest figure of the Irish revival if not the greatest of all living poets, has accomplished notable things both in original work and in the codification of old legends.

X. The Modern Masters

     The best horror-tales of today, profiting by the long evolution of the type, possess a naturalness, convincingness, artistic smoothness, and skilful intensity of appeal quite beyond comparison with anything in the Gothic work of a century or more ago. Technique, craftsmanship, experience, and psychological knowledge have advanced tremendously with the passing years, so that much of the older work seems naive and artificial; redeemed, when redeemed at all, only by a genius which conquers heavy limitations. The tone of jaunty and inflated romance, full of false motivation and investing every conceivable event with a counterfeit significance and carelessly inclusive glamour, is now confined to lighter and more whimsical phases of supernatural writing. Serious weird stories are either made realistically intense by close consistency and perfect fidelity to Nature except in the one supernatural direction which the author allows himself, or else cast altogether in the realm of phantasy, with atmosphere cunningly adapted to the visualisation of a delicately exotic world of unreality beyond space and time, in which almost anything may happen if it but happen in true accord with certain types of imagination and illusion normal to the sensitive human brain. This, at least, is the dominant tendency; though of course many great contemporary writers slip occasionally into some of the flashy postures of immature romanticism, or into bits of the equally empty and absurd jargon of pseudo-scientific occultism, now at one of its periodic high tides.

     Of living creators of cosmic fear raised to its most artistic pitch, few if any can hope to equal the versatile Arthur Machen; author of some dozen tales long and short, in which the elements of hidden horror and brooding fright attain an almost incomparable substance and realistic acuteness. Mr. Machen, a general man of letters and master of an exquisitely lyrical and expressive prose style, has perhaps put more conscious effort into his picaresque Chronicle of Clemendy, his refreshing essays, his vivid autobiographical volumes, his fresh and spirited translations, and above all his memorable epic of the sensitive aesthetic mind, The Hill of Dreams, in which the youthful hero responds to the magic of that ancient Welsh environment which is the author's own, and lives a dream-life in the Roman city of Isca Silurum, now shrunk to the relic-strown village of Caerleon-on-Usk. But the fact remains that his powerful horror-material of the 'nineties and earlier nineteen-hundreds stands alone in its class, and marks a distinct epoch in the history of this literary form.
     Mr. Machen, with an impressionable Celtic heritage linked to keen youthful memories of the wild domed hills, archaic forests, and cryptical Roman ruins of the Gwent countryside, has developed an imaginative life of rare beauty, intensity, and historic background. He has absorbed the mediaeval mystery of dark woods and ancient customs, and is a champion of the Middle Ages in all things—including the Catholic faith. He has yielded, likewise, to the spell of the Britanno-Roman life which once surged over his native region; and finds strange magic in the fortified camps, tessellated pavements, fragments of statues, and kindred things which tell of the day when classicism reigned and Latin was the language of the country. A young American poet, Frank Belknap Long, Jun., has well summarised this dreamer's rich endowments and wizardry of expression in the sonnet On Reading Arthur Machen
There is a glory in the autumn wood;
The ancient lanes of England wind and climb
Past wizard oaks and gorse and tangled thyme
To where a fort of mighty empire stood
There is a glamour in the autumn sky;
The reddened clouds are writhing in the glow
Of some great fire, and there are glints below
Of tawny yellow where the embers die.

I wait, for he will show me, clear and cold,
High-rais'd in splendour, sharp against the North,
The Roman eagles, and thro' mists of gold
The marching legions as they issue forth
I wait, for I would share with him again
The ancient wisdom, and the ancient pain.
     Of Mr. Machen's horror-tales the most famous is perhaps The Great God Pan (1894), which tells of a singular and terrible experiment and its consequences. A young woman, through surgery of the brain-cells, is made to see the vast and monstrous deity of Nature, and becomes an idiot in consequence, dying less than a year later. Years afterward a strange, ominous, and foreign-looking child named Helen Vaughan is placed to board with a family in rural Wales, and haunts the woods in unaccountable fashion. A little boy is thrown out of his mind at sight of someone or something he spies with her, and a young girl comes to a terrible end in similar fashion. All this mystery is strangely interwoven with the Roman rural deities of the place, as sculptured in antique fragments. After another lapse of years, a woman of strangely exotic beauty appears in society, drives her husband to horror and death, causes an artist to paint unthinkable paintings of Witches' Sabbaths, creates an epidemic of suicide among the men of her acquaintance, and is finally discovered to be a frequenter of the lowest dens of vice in London, where even the most callous degenerates are shocked at her enormities. Through the clever comparing of notes on the part of those who have had word of her at various stages of her career, this woman is discovered to be the girl Helen Vaughan; who is the child—by no mortal father—of the young woman on whom the brain experiment was made. She is a daughter of hideous Pan himself, and at the last is put to death amidst horrible transmutations of form involving changes of sex and a descent to the most primal manifestations of the life-principle.
     But the charm of the tale is in the telling. No one could begin to describe the cumulative suspense and ultimate horror with which every paragraph abounds without following fully the precise order in which Mr. Machen unfolds his gradual hints and revelations. Melodrama is undeniably present, and coincidence is stretched to a length which appears absurd upon analysis; but in the malign witchery of the tale as a whole these trifles are forgotten, and the sensitive reader reaches the end with only an appreciative shudder and a tendency to repeat the words of one of the characters It is too incredible, too monstrous; such things can never be in this quiet world. . . . Why, man, if such a case were possible, our earth would be a nightmare.
     Less famous and less complex in plot than The Great God Pan, but definitely finer in atmosphere and general artistic value, is the curious and dimly disquieting chronicle called The White People, whose central portion purports to be the diary or notes of a little girl whose nurse has introduced her to some of the forbidden magic and soul-blasting traditions of the noxious witch-cult—the cult whose whispered lore was handed down long lines of peasantry throughout Western Europe, and whose members sometimes stole forth at night, one by one, to meet in black woods and lonely places for the revolting orgies of the Witches' Sabbath. Mr. Machen's narrative, a triumph of skilful selectiveness and restraint, accumulates enormous power as it flows on in a stream of innocent childish prattle; introducing allusions to strange nymphs, Dôls, voolas, White, Green, and Scarlet Ceremonies, Aklo letters, Chian language, Mao games, and the like. The rites learned by the nurse from her witch grandmother are taught to the child by the time she is three years old, and her artless accounts of the dangerous secret revelations possess a lurking terror generously mixed with pathos. Evil charms well known to anthropologists are described with juvenile naiveté, and finally there comes a winter afternoon journey into the old Welsh hills, performed under an imaginative spell which lends to the wild scenery an added weirdness, strangeness, and suggestion of grotesque sentience. The details of this journey are given with marvellous vividness, and form to the keen critic a masterpiece of fantastic writing, with almost unlimited power in the intimation of potent hideousness and cosmic aberration. At length the child—whose age is then thirteen—comes upon a cryptic and banefully beautiful thing in the midst of a dark and inaccessible wood. She flees in awe, but is permanently altered and repeatedly revisits the wood. In the end horror overtakes her in a manner deftly prefigured by an anecdote in the prologue, but she poisons herself in time. Like the mother of Helen Vaughan in The Great God Pan, she has seen that frightful deity. She is discovered dead in the dark wood beside the cryptic thing she found; and that thing—a whitely luminous statue of Roman workmanship about which dire mediaeval rumours had clustered—is affrightedly hammered into dust by the searchers.
     In the episodic novel of The Three Impostors, a work whose merit as a whole is somewhat marred by an imitation of the jaunty Stevenson manner, occur certain tales which perhaps represent the high-water mark of Machen's skill as a terror-weaver. Here we find in its most artistic form a favourite weird conception of the author's; the notion that beneath the mounds and rocks of the wild Welsh hills dwell subterraneously that squat primitive race whose vestiges gave rise to our common folk legends of fairies, elves, and the little people, and whose acts are even now responsible for certain unexplained disappearances, and occasional substitutions of strange dark changelings for normal infants. This theme receives its finest treatment in the episode entitled The Novel of the Black Seal; where a professor, having discovered a singular identity between certain characters scrawled on Welsh limestone rocks and those existing in a prehistoric black seal from Babylon, sets out on a course of discovery which leads him to unknown and terrible things. A queer passage in the ancient geographer Solinus, a series of mysterious disappearances in the lonely reaches of Wales, a strange idiot son born to a rural mother after a fright in which her inmost faculties were shaken; all these things suggest to the professor a hideous connexion and a condition revolting to any friend and respecter of the human race. He hires the idiot boy, who jabbers strangely at times in a repulsive hissing voice, and is subject to odd epileptic seizures. Once, after such a seizure in the professor's study by night, disquieting odours and evidences of unnatural presences are found; and soon after that the professor leaves a bulky document and goes into the weird hills with feverish expectancy and strange terror in his heart. He never returns, but beside a fantastic stone in the wild country are found his watch, money, and ring, done up with catgut in a parchment bearing the same terrible characters as those on the black Babylonish seal and the rock in the Welsh mountains.
     The bulky document explains enough to bring up the most hideous vistas. Professor Gregg, from the massed evidence presented by the Welsh disappearances, the rock inscription, the accounts of ancient geographers, and the black seal, has decided that a frightful race of dark primal beings of immemorial antiquity and wide former diffusion still dwells beneath the hills of unfrequented Wales. Further research has unriddled the message of the black seal, and proved that the idiot boy, a son of some father more terrible than mankind, is the heir of monstrous memories and possibilities. That strange night in the study the professor invoked ‘the awful transmutation of the hills' by the aid of the black seal, and aroused in the hybrid idiot the horrors of his shocking paternity. He saw his body swell and become distended as a bladder, while the face blackened. . . . And then the supreme effects of the invocation appeared, and Professor Gregg knew the stark frenzy of cosmic panic in its darkest form. He knew the abysmal gulfs of abnormality that he had opened, and went forth into the wild hills prepared and resigned. He would meet the unthinkable ‘Little People'—and his document ends with a rational observation If I unhappily do not return from my journey, there is no need to conjure up here a picture of the awfulness of my fate.
     Also in The Three Impostors is the Novel of the White Powder, which approaches the absolute culmination of loathsome fright. Francis Leicester, a young law student nervously worn out by seclusion and overwork, has a prescription filled by an old apothecary none too careful about the state of his drugs. The substance, it later turns out, is an unusual salt which time and varying temperature have accidentally changed to something very strange and terrible; nothing less, in short, than the mediaeval Vinum Sabbati, whose consumption at the horrible orgies of the Witches' Sabbath gave rise to shocking transformations and—if injudiciously used—to unutterable consequences. Innocently enough, the youth regularly imbibes the powder in a glass of water after meals; and at first seems substantially benefited. Gradually, however, his improved spirits take the form of dissipation; he is absent from home a great deal, and appears to have undergone a repellent psychological change. One day an odd livid spot appears on his right hand, and he afterward returns to his seclusion; finally keeping himself shut within his room and admitting none of the household. The doctor calls for an interview, and departs in a palsy of horror, saying that he can do no more in that house. Two weeks later the patient's sister, walking outside, sees a monstrous thing at the sickroom window; and servants report that food left at the locked door is no longer touched. Summons at the door bring only a sound of shuffling and a demand in a thick gurgling voice to be let alone. At last an awful happening is reported by a shuddering housemaid. The ceiling of the room below Leicester's is stained with a hideous black fluid, and a pool of viscid abomination has dripped to the bed beneath. Dr. Haberden, now persuaded to return to the house, breaks down the young man's door and strikes again and again with an iron bar at the blasphemous semi-living thing he finds there. It is a dark and putrid mass, seething with corruption and hideous rottenness, neither liquid nor solid, but melting and changing. Burning points like eyes shine out of its midst, and before it is despatched it tries to lift what might have been an arm. Soon afterward the physician, unable to endure the memory of what he has beheld, dies at sea while bound for a new life in America.
     Mr. Machen returns to the daemoniac Little People in The Red Hand and The Shining Pyramid; and in The Terror, a wartime story, he treats with very potent mystery the effect of man's modern repudiation of spirituality on the beasts of the world, which are thus led to question his supremacy and to unite for his extermination. Of utmost delicacy, and passing from mere horror into true mysticism, is The Great Return, a story of the Graal, also a product of the war period. Too well known to need description here is the tale of The Bowmen; which, taken for authentic narration, gave rise to the widespread legend of the Angels of Mons—ghosts of the old English archers of Crécy and Agincourt who fought in 1914 beside the hard-pressed ranks of England's glorious Old Contemptibles.

     Less intense than Mr. Machen in delineating the extremes of stark fear, yet infinitely more closely wedded to the idea of an unreal world constantly pressing upon ours, is the inspired and prolific Algernon Blackwood, amidst whose voluminous and uneven work may be found some of the finest spectral literature of this or any age. Of the quality of Mr. Blackwood's genius there can be no dispute; for no one has even approached the skill, seriousness, and minute fidelity with which he records the overtones of strangeness in ordinary things and experiences, or the preternatural insight with which he builds up detail by detail the complete sensations and perceptions leading from reality into supernormal life or vision. Without notable command of the poetic witchery of mere words, he is the one absolute and unquestioned master of weird atmosphere; and can evoke what amounts almost to a story from a simple fragment of humourless psychological description. Above all others he understands how fully some sensitive minds dwell forever on the borderland of dream, and how relatively slight is the distinction betwixt those images formed from actual objects and those excited by the play of the imagination.
     Mr. Blackwood's lesser work is marred by several defects such as ethical didacticism, occasional insipid whimsicality, the flatness of benignant supernaturalism, and a too free use of the trade jargon of modern occultism. A fault of his more serious efforts is that diffuseness and long-windedness which results from an excessively elaborate attempt, under the handicap of a somewhat bald and journalistic style devoid of intrinsic magic, colour, and vitality, to visualise precise sensations and nuances of uncanny suggestion. But in spite of all this, the major products of Mr. Blackwood attain a genuinely classic level, and evoke as does nothing else in literature an awed and convinced sense of the immanence of strange spiritual spheres or entities.
     The well-nigh endless array of Mr. Blackwood's fiction includes both novels and shorter tales, the latter sometimes independent and sometimes arrayed in series. Foremost of all must be reckoned The Willows, in which the nameless presences on a desolate Danube island are horribly felt and recognised by a pair of idle voyagers. Here art and restraint in narrative reach their very highest development, and an impression of lasting poignancy is produced without a single strained passage or a single false note. Another amazingly potent though less artistically finished tale is The Wendigo, where we are confronted by horrible evidences of a vast forest daemon about which North Woods lumbermen whisper at evening. The manner in which certain footprints tell certain unbelievable things is really a marked triumph in craftsmanship. In An Episode in a Lodging House we behold frightful presences summoned out of black space by a sorcerer, and The Listener tells of the awful psychic residuum creeping about an old house where a leper died. In the volume titled Incredible Adventures occur some of the finest tales which the author has yet produced, leading the fancy to wild rites on nocturnal hills, to secret and terrible aspects lurking behind stolid scenes, and to unimaginable vaults of mystery below the sands and pyramids of Egypt; all with a serious finesse and delicacy that convince where a cruder or lighter treatment would merely amuse. Some of these accounts are hardly stories at all, but rather studies in elusive impressions and half-remembered snatches of dream. Plot is everywhere negligible, and atmosphere reigns untrammelled.
     John Silence—Physician Extraordinary is a book of five related tales, through which a single character runs his triumphant course. Marred only by traces of the popular and conventional detective-story atmosphere—for Dr. Silence is one of those benevolent geniuses who employ their remarkable powers to aid worthy fellow-men in difficulty—these narratives contain some of the author's best work, and produce an illusion at once emphatic and lasting. The opening tale, A Psychical Invasion, relates what befell a sensitive author in a house once the scene of dark deeds, and how a legion of fiends was exorcised. Ancient Sorceries, perhaps the finest tale in the book, gives an almost hypnotically vivid account of an old French town where once the unholy Sabbath was kept by all the people in the form of cats. In The Nemesis of Fire a hideous elemental is evoked by new-spilt blood, whilst Secret Worship tells of a German school where Satanism held sway, and where long afterward an evil aura remained. The Camp of the Dog is a werewolf tale, but is weakened by moralisation and professional occultism.
     Too subtle, perhaps, for definite classification as horror-tales, yet possibly more truly artistic in an absolute sense, are such delicate phantasies as Jimbo or The Centaur. Mr. Blackwood achieves in these novels a close and palpitant approach to the inmost substance of dream, and works enormous havock with the conventional barriers between reality and imagination.

     Unexcelled in the sorcery of crystalline singing prose, and supreme in the creation of a gorgeous and languorous world of iridescently exotic vision, is Edward John Moreton Drax Plunkett, Eighteenth Baron Dunsany, whose tales and short plays form an almost unique element in our literature. Inventor of a new mythology and weaver of surprising folklore, Lord Dunsany stands dedicated to a strange world of fantastic beauty, and pledged to eternal warfare against the coarseness and ugliness of diurnal reality. His point of view is the most truly cosmic of any held in the literature of any period. As sensitive as Poe to dramatic values and the significance of isolated words and details, and far better equipped rhetorically through a simple lyric style based on the prose of the King James Bible, this author draws with tremendous effectiveness on nearly every body of myth and legend within the circle of European culture; producing a composite or eclectic cycle of phantasy in which Eastern colour, Hellenic form, Teutonic sombreness, and Celtic wistfulness are so superbly blended that each sustains and supplements the rest without sacrifice of perfect congruity and homogeneity. In most cases Dunsany's lands are fabulous—beyond the East, or at the edge of the world. His system of original personal and place names, with roots drawn from classical, Oriental, and other sources, is a marvel of versatile inventiveness and poetic discrimination; as one may see from such specimens as Argimēnēs, Bethmoora, Poltarnees, Camorak, Illuriel, or Sardathrion.
     Beauty rather than terror is the keynote of Dunsany's work. He loves the vivid green of jade and of copper domes, and the delicate flush of sunset on the ivory minarets of impossible dream-cities. Humour and irony, too, are often present to impart a gentle cynicism and modify what might otherwise possess a naive intensity. Nevertheless, as is inevitable in a master of triumphant unreality, there are occasional touches of cosmic fright which come well within the authentic tradition. Dunsany loves to hint slyly and adroitly of monstrous things and incredible dooms, as one hints in a fairy tale. In The Book of Wonder we read of Hlo-hlo, the gigantic spider-idol which does not always stay at home; of what the Sphinx feared in the forest; of Slith, the thief who jumps over the edge of the world after seeing a certain light lit and knowing who lit it; of the anthropophagous Gibbelins, who inhabit an evil tower and guard a treasure; of the Gnoles, who live in the forest and from whom it is not well to steal; of the City of Never, and the eyes that watch in the Under Pits; and of kindred things of darkness. A Dreamer's Tales tells of the mystery that sent forth all men from Bethmoora in the desert; of the vast gate of Perdóndaris, that was carved from a single piece of ivory; and of the voyage of poor old Bill, whose captain cursed the crew and paid calls on nasty-looking isles new-risen from the sea, with low thatched cottages having evil, obscure windows.
     Many of Dunsany's short plays are replete with spectral fear. In The Gods of the Mountain seven beggars impersonate the seven green idols on a distant hill, and enjoy ease and honour in a city of worshippers until they hear that the real idols are missing from their wonted seats. A very ungainly sight in the dusk is reported to them—rock should not walk in the evening—and at last, as they sit awaiting the arrival of a troop of dancers, they note that the approaching footsteps are heavier than those of good dancers ought to be. Then things ensue, and in the end the presumptuous blasphemers are turned to green jade statues by the very walking statues whose sanctity they outraged. But mere plot is the very least merit of this marvellously effective play. The incidents and developments are those of a supreme master, so that the whole forms one of the most important contributions of the present age not only to drama, but to literature in general. A Night at an Inn tells of four thieves who have stolen the emerald eye of Klesh, a monstrous Hindoo god. They lure to their room and succeed in slaying the three priestly avengers who are on their track, but in the night Klesh comes gropingly for his eye; and having gained it and departed, calls each of the despoilers out into the darkness for an unnamed punishment. In The Laughter of the Gods there is a doomed city at the jungle's edge, and a ghostly lutanist heard only by those about to die (cf. Alice's spectral harpsichord in Hawthorne's House of the Seven Gables); whilst The Queen's Enemies retells the anecdote of Herodotus in which a vengeful princess invites her foes to a subterranean banquet and lets in the Nile to drown them.
     But no amount of mere description can convey more than a fraction of Lord Dunsany's pervasive charm. His prismatic cities and unheard-of rites are touched with a sureness which only mastery can engender, and we thrill with a sense of actual participation in his secret mysteries. To the truly imaginative he is a talisman and a key unlocking rich storehouses of dream and fragmentary memory; so that we may think of him not only as a poet, but as one who makes each reader a poet as well.

     At the opposite pole of genius from Lord Dunsany, and gifted with an almost diabolic power of calling horror by gentle steps from the midst of prosaic daily life, is the scholarly Montague Rhodes James, Provost of Eton College, antiquary of note, and recognised authority on mediaeval manuscripts and cathedral history. Dr. James, long fond of telling spectral tales at Christmastide, has become by slow degrees a literary weird fictionist of the very first rank; and has developed a distinctive style and method likely to serve as models for an enduring line of disciples.
     The art of Dr. James is by no means haphazard, and in the preface to one of his collections he has formulated three very sound rules for macabre composition. A ghost story, he believes, should have a familiar setting in the modern period, in order to approach closely the reader's sphere of experience. Its spectral phenomena, moreover, should be malevolent rather than beneficent; since fear is the emotion primarily to be excited. And finally, the technical patois of occultism or pseudo-science ought carefully to be avoided; lest the charm of casual verisimilitude be smothered in unconvincing pedantry.
     Dr. James, practicing what he preaches, approaches his themes in a light and often conversational way. Creating the illusion of every-day events, he introduces his abnormal phenomena cautiously and gradually; relieved at every turn by touches of homely and prosaic detail, and sometimes spiced with a snatch or two of antiquarian scholarship. Conscious of the close relation between present weirdness and accumulated tradition, he generally provides remote historical antecedents for his incidents; thus being able to utilise very aptly his exhaustive knowledge of the past, and his ready and convincing command of archaic diction and colouring. A favourite scene for a James tale is some centuried cathedral, which the author can describe with all the familiar minuteness of a specialist in that field.
     Sly humorous vignettes and bits of life-like genre portraiture and characterisation are often to be found in Dr. James's narratives, and serve in his skilled hands to augment the general effect rather than to spoil it, as the same qualities would tend to do with a lesser craftsman. In inventing a new type of ghost, he has departed considerably from the conventional Gothic tradition; for where the older stock ghosts were pale and stately, and apprehended chiefly through the sense of sight, the average James ghost is lean, dwarfish, and hairy—a sluggish, hellish night-abomination midway betwixt beast and man—and usually touched before it is seen. Sometimes the spectre is of still more eccentric composition; a roll of flannel with spidery eyes, or an invisible entity which moulds itself in bedding and shews a face of crumpled linen. Dr. James has, it is clear, an intelligent and scientific knowledge of human nerves and feelings; and knows just how to apportion statement, imagery, and subtle suggestions in order to secure the best results with his readers. He is an artist in incident and arrangement rather than in atmosphere, and reaches the emotions more often through the intellect than directly. This method, of course, with its occasional absences of sharp climax, has its drawbacks as well as its advantages; and many will miss the thorough atmospheric tension which writers like Machen are careful to build up with words and scenes. But only a few of the tales are open to the charge of tameness. Generally the laconic unfolding of abnormal events in adroit order is amply sufficient to produce the desired effect of cumulative horror.
     The short stories of Dr. James are contained in four small collections, entitled respectively Ghost-Stories of an Antiquary, More Ghost Stories of an Antiquary, A Thin Ghost and Others, and A Warning to the Curious. There is also a delightful juvenile phantasy, The Five Jars, which has its spectral adumbrations. Amidst this wealth of material it is hard to select a favourite or especially typical tale, though each reader will no doubt have such preferences as his temperament may determine.
     Count Magnus is assuredly one of the best, forming as it does a veritable Golconda of suspense and suggestion. Mr. Wraxall is an English traveller of the middle nineteenth century, sojourning in Sweden to secure material for a book. Becoming interested in the ancient family of De la Gardie, near the village of Råbäck, he studies its records; and finds particular fascination in the builder of the existing manor-house, one Count Magnus, of whom strange and terrible things are whispered. The Count, who flourished early in the seventeenth century, was a stern landlord, and famous for his severity toward poachers and delinquent tenants. His cruel punishments were bywords, and there were dark rumours of influences which even survived his interment in the great mausoleum he built near the church—as in the case of the two peasants who hunted on his preserves one night a century after his death. There were hideous screams in the woods, and near the tomb of Count Magnus an unnatural laugh and the clang of a great door. Next morning the priest found the two men; one a maniac, and the other dead, with the flesh of his face sucked from the bones.
     Mr. Wraxall hears all these tales, and stumbles on more guarded references to a Black Pilgrimage once taken by the Count; a pilgrimage to Chorazin in Palestine, one of the cities denounced by Our Lord in the Scriptures, and in which old priests say that Antichrist is to be born. No one dares to hint just what that Black Pilgrimage was, or what strange being or thing the Count brought back as a companion. Meanwhile Mr. Wraxall is increasingly anxious to explore the mausoleum of Count Magnus, and finally secures permission to do so, in the company of a deacon. He finds several monuments and three copper sarcophagi, one of which is the Count's. Round the edge of this latter are several bands of engraved scenes, including a singular and hideous delineation of a pursuit—the pursuit of a frantic man through a forest by a squat muffled figure with a devil-fish's tentacle, directed by a tall cloaked man on a neighbouring hillock. The sarcophagus has three massive steel padlocks, one of which is lying open on the floor, reminding the traveller of a metallic clash he heard the day before when passing the mausoleum and wishing idly that he might see Count Magnus.
     His fascination augmented, and the key being accessible, Mr. Wraxall pays the mausoleum a second and solitary visit and finds another padlock unfastened. The next day, his last in Råbäck, he again goes alone to bid the long-dead Count farewell. Once more queerly impelled to utter a whimsical wish for a meeting with the buried nobleman, he now sees to his disquiet that only one of the padlocks remains on the great sarcophagus. Even as he looks, that last lock drops noisily to the floor, and there comes a sound as of creaking hinges. Then the monstrous lid appears very slowly to rise, and Mr. Wraxall flees in panic fear without refastening the door of the mausoleum.
     During his return to England the traveller feels a curious uneasiness about his fellow-passengers on the canal-boat which he employs for the earlier stages. Cloaked figures make him nervous, and he has a sense of being watched and followed. Of twenty-eight persons whom he counts, only twenty-six appear at meals; and the missing two are always a tall cloaked man and a shorter muffled figure. Completing his water travel at Harwich, Mr. Wraxall takes frankly to flight in a closed carriage, but sees two cloaked figures at a crossroad. Finally he lodges at a small house in a village and spends the time making frantic notes. On the second morning he is found dead, and during the inquest seven jurors faint at sight of the body. The house where he stayed is never again inhabited, and upon its demolition half a century later his manuscript is discovered in a forgotten cupboard.
     In The Treasure of Abbot Thomas a British antiquary unriddles a cipher on some Renaissance painted windows, and thereby discovers a centuried hoard of gold in a niche half way down a well in the courtyard of a German abbey. But the crafty depositor had set a guardian over that treasure, and something in the black well twines its arms around the searcher's neck in such a manner that the quest is abandoned, and a clergyman sent for. Each night after that the discoverer feels a stealthy presence and detects a horrible odour of mould outside the door of his hotel room, till finally the clergyman makes a daylight replacement of the stone at the mouth of the treasure-vault in the well—out of which something had come in the dark to avenge the disturbing of old Abbot Thomas's gold. As he completes his work the cleric observes a curious toad-like carving on the ancient well-head, with the Latin motto Depositum custodi—keep that which is committed to thee.
     Other notable James tales are The Stalls of Barchester Cathedral, in which a grotesque carving comes curiously to life to avenge the secret and subtle murder of an old Dean by his ambitious successor; ‘Oh, Whistle, and I'll Come to You, My Lad', which tells of the horror summoned by a strange metal whistle found in a mediaeval church ruin; and An Episode of Cathedral History, where the dismantling of a pulpit uncovers an archaic tomb whose lurking daemon spreads panic and pestilence. Dr. James, for all his light touch, evokes fright and hideousness in their most shocking forms; and will certainly stand as one of the few really creative masters in his darksome province.

     For those who relish speculation regarding the future, the tale of supernatural horror provides an interesting field. Combated by a mounting wave of plodding realism, cynical flippancy, and sophisticated disillusionment, it is yet encouraged by a parallel tide of growing mysticism, as developed both through the fatigued reaction of occultists and religious fundamentalists against materialistic discovery and through the stimulation of wonder and fancy by such enlarged vistas and broken barriers as modern science has given us with its intra-atomic chemistry, advancing astrophysics, doctrines of relativity, and probings into biology and human thought. At the present moment the favouring forces would appear to have somewhat of an advantage; since there is unquestionably more cordiality shewn toward weird writings than when, thirty years ago, the best of Arthur Machen's work fell on the stony ground of the smart and cocksure 'nineties. Ambrose Bierce, almost unknown in his own time, has now reached something like general recognition.
     Startling mutations, however, are not to be looked for in either direction. In any case an approximate balance of tendencies will continue to exist; and while we may justly expect a further subtilisation of technique, we have no reason to think that the general position of the spectral in literature will be altered. It is a narrow though essential branch of human expression, and will chiefly appeal as always to a limited audience with keen special sensibilities. Whatever universal masterpiece of tomorrow may be wrought from phantasm or terror will owe its acceptance rather to a supreme workmanship than to a sympathetic theme. Yet who shall declare the dark theme a positive handicap? Radiant with beauty, the Cup of the Ptolemies was carven of onyx.
     
It was a fine summer morning, the kind to make a man happy to be alive. And probably the man would have been happier to be alive. He was, in fact, dead. It would be hard to be deader without special training.

Well, now, said Sergeant Colon (Ankh-Morpork City Guard, Night Watch), consulting his notebook, so far we have cause of death as a) being beaten with at least one blunt instrument b) being strangled with a string of sausages and c) being savaged by at least two animals with big sharp teeth. What do we do now, Nobby?

Arrest the suspect, Sarge, said Corporal Nobbs, saluting smartly.

Suspect, Nobby?

Him, said Nobby, prodding the corpse with his boot. I call it highly suspicious, being dead like that. He's been drinking, too. We could do him for being dead and disorderly.

Colon scratched his head. Arresting the corpse offered, of course, certain advantages. But...

I reckon, he said slowly, that Captain Vimes'll want this one sorted out. You'd better bring it back to the Watch House, Nobby.

And then can we eat the sausages, sarge? said Corporal Nobbs.

It wasn't easy, being the senior policeman in Ankh-Morpork, greatest of cities of the Discworld [*].

There were probably worlds, captain Vimes mused in his gloomier moments, where there weren't wizards (who made locked room mysteries commonplace) or zombies (murder cases were really strange when the victim could be the chief witness) and where dogs could be relied on to do nothing in the night time and not go around chatting to people. Captain Vimes believed in logic, in much the same way as a man in a desert believed in ice -- i.e., it was something he really needed, but this just wasn't the world for it. Just once, he thought, it'd be nice to solve something.

He looked at the blue-faced body on the slab, and felt a tiny flicker of excitement. There were clues. He'd never seen proper clues before.

Couldn't have been a robber, Captain, said Sergeant Colon. The reason being, his pockets were full of money. Eleven dollars.

I wouldn't call that full, said Captain Vimes.

It was all in pennies and ha'pennies, sir. I'm amazed his trousers stood the strain. And I have cunningly detected the fact that he was a showman, sir. He had some cards in his pocket, sir. 'Chas Slumber, Children's Entertainer'.

I suppose no one saw anything? said Vimes.

Well, sir, said Sergeant Colon helpfully, I told young Constable Carrot to find some witnesses.

You asked Corporal Carrot to investigate a murder? All by himself? said Vimes.

The sergeant scratched his head.

And he said to me, did I know anyone very old and seriously ill?

And on the magical Discworld, there is always one guaranteed witness to any homicide. It's his job.

Constable Carrot, the Watch's youngest member, often struck people as simple. And he was. He was incredibly simple, but in the same way that a sword is simple, or an ambush is simple. He was also possibly the most linear thinker in the history of the universe.

He'd been waiting by the bedside of an old man, who'd quite enjoyed the company. And now it was time to take out his notebook.

Now I know you saw something, sir, he said. You were there.

WELL, YES, said Death. I HAVE TO BE, YOU KNOW. BUT THIS IS VERY IRREGULAR.

You see, sir, said Corporal Carrot, as I understand the law, you are an Accessory After The Fact. Or possibly Before The Fact.

YOUNG MAN, I AM THE FACT.

And I am an officer of the Law, said Corporal Carrot. There's got to be a law, you know.

YOU WANT ME TO... ER... GRASS SOMEONE UP? DROP A DIME ON SOMEONE? SING LIKE A PIGEON? NO. NO-ONE KILLED MR. SLUMBER. I CAN'T HELP YOU THERE.

Oh, I don't know, sir, said Carrot, I think you have.

DAMN.

Death watched Carrot leave, ducking his head as he went down the narrow stairs of the hovel.

NOW THEN, WHERE WAS I...

Excuse me, said the wizened old man in the bed. I happen to be 107, you know. I haven't got all day.

AH, YES, CORRECT.

Death sharpened his scythe. It was the first time he'd ever helped the police with their enquiries. Still, everyone had a job to do.

Corporal Carrot strolled easily around the town. He had a Theory. He'd read a book about Theories. You added up all the clues, and you got a Theory. Everything had to fit.

There were sausages. Someone had to buy sausages. And then there were pennies. Normally only one subsection of the human race paid for things in pennies.

He called in at a sausage maker. He found a group of children, and chatted to them for a while.

Then he ambled back to the alley, where Corporal Nobbs had chalked the outline of the corpse on the ground (colouring it in, and adding a pipe and a walking stick and some trees and bushes in the background -- people had already dropped 7p in his helmet). He paid some attention to the heap of rubbish at the far end, and then sat down on a busted barrel.

All right... you can come out now, he said, to the world at large. I didn't know there were any gnomes left in the world.

The rubbish rustled. They trooped out -- the little man with the red hat, the hunched back and the hooked nose, the little woman in the mob cap carrying the even smaller baby, the little policeman, the dog with the ruff around its neck, and the very small alligator.

Corporal Carrot sat and listened.

He made us do it, said the little man. He had a surprisingly deep voice. He used to beat us. Even the alligator. That was all he understood, hitting things with sticks. And he used to take all the money the dog Toby collected and get drunk. And then we ran away and he caught us in the alley and started on Judy and the baby and he fell over and --

Who hit him first? said Carrot.

All of us!

But not very hard, said Carrot. You're all too small. You didn't kill him. I have a very convincing statement about that. So I went and had another look at him. He'd choked to death. What's this?

He held up a little leather disc.

It's a swozzle, said the little policeman. He used it for the voices. He said ours weren't funny enough.

That's the way to do it! said the one called Judy.

It was stuck in his throat, said Carrot. I suggest you run away. Just as far as you can.

We thought we could start a people's co-operative, said the leading gnome.

You know... experimental drama, street theatre, that sort of thing. Not hitting each other with sticks...

You did that for children? said Carrot.

He said it was a new sort of entertainment. He said it'd catch on.

Carrot stood up, and flicked the swozzle into the rubbish.

People'll never stand for it, he said. That's not the way to do it.

When Death met the philosopher, the philosopher said, rather excitedly At this point, you realise, I'm both dead and not dead.

There was a sigh from Death. Oh dear, one of those, he thought. This is going to be about quantum again. He hated dealing with philosophers. They always tried to wriggle out of it.

You see, said the philosopher, while Death, motionless, watched the sands of his life drain through the hourglass, everything is made of tiny particles, which have the strange property of being in many places at one time. But things made of tiny particles tend to stay in one place at one time, which does not seem right according to quantum theory. May I continue?

YES, BUT NOT INDEFINITELY, said Death, EVERYTHING IS TRANSIENT. He did not take his gaze away from the tumbling sand.

Well, then, if we agreed that there are an infinite number of universes, then the problem is solved! If there are an unlimited number of universes, this bed can be in millions of them, all at the same time!

DOES IT MOVE?

What?

Death nodded at the bed. CAN YOU FEEL IT MOVING? he said.

No, because there are a million versions of me, too, And...here is the good bit ...in some of them I am not about to pass away! Anything is possible!

Death tapped the handle of his scythe as he considered this.

AND YOUR POINT IS...?

Well, I'm not exactly dying, correct? You are no longer such a certainty.

There was a sigh from Death. Space he thought. That was the trouble. It was never like this on worlds with everlastingly cloudy skies. But once humans saw all that space, their brains expanded to try and fill it up.

No answer, eh? said the dying philosopher. Feel a bit old-fashioned, do we?

THIS IS A CONUNDRUM CERTAINLY, said Death. Once they prayed, he thought. Mind you, he'd never been sure that prayer worked, either. He thought for a while. AND I SHALL ANSWER IT IN THIS MANNER, he added. YOU LOVE YOUR WIFE?

What?

THE LADY WHO HAS BEEN LOOKING AFTER YOU. YOU LOVE HER?

Yes. Of course.

CAN YOU THINK OF ANY CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE, WITHOUT YOUR PERSONAL HISTORY CHANGING IN ANY WAY YOU WOULD AT THIS MOMENT PICK UP A KNIFE AND STAB HER? said Death. FOR EXAMPLE?

Certainly not!

BUT YOUR THEORY SAYS THAT YOU MUST. IT IS EASILY POSSIBLE WITHIN THE PHYSICAL LAWS OF THE UNIVERSE, AND THEREFORE MUST HAPPEN, AND HAPPEN MANY TIMES. EVERY MOMENT IS A BILLION, BILLION MOMENTS, AND IN THOSE MOMENTS ALL THINGS THAT ARE POSSIBLE ARE INEVITABLE. ALL TIME SOONER OR LATER, BOILS DOWN TO A MOMENT.

But of course we can make choices between-

ARE THERE CHOICES? EVERYTHING THAT CAN HAPPEN, MUST HAPPEN. YOUR THEORY SAYS THAT FOR EVERY UNIVERSE THAT'S FORMED TO ACCOMMODATE YOUR 'NO', THERE MUST BE ONE TO ACCOMMODATE YOUR 'YES'. BUT YOU SAID YOU WOULD NEVER COMMIT MURDER. THE FABRIC OF THE COSMOS TREMBLES BEFORE YOUR TERRIBLE CERTAINTY. YOUR MORALITY BECOMES A FORCE AS STRONG AS GRAVITY. And, thought Death, space certainly has a lot to answer for.

Was that sarcasm?

ACTUALLY, NO. I AM IMPRESSED AND INTRIGUED, said Death. THE CONCEPT YOU PUT BEFORE ME PROVES THE EXISTENCE OF TWO HITHERTO MYTHICAL PLACES. SOMEWHERE, THERE IS A WORLD WHERE EVERYONE MADE THE RIGHT CHOICE, THE MORAL CHOICE, THE CHOICE THAT MAXIMISED THE HAPPINESS OF THEIR FELLOW CREATURES, OF COURSE, THAT ALSO MEANS THAT SOMEWHERE ELSE IS THE SMOKING REMNANT OF THE WORLD WHERE THEY DID NOT ...

Oh, come on! I know what you're implying, and I've never believed in any of that Heaven and Hell nonsense!

The room was growing darker. The blue gleam along the edge of the reaper's scythe was becoming more obvious.

ASTONISHING, said Death. REALLY ASTONISHING. LET ME PUT FORWARD ANOTHER SUGGESTION THAT YOU ARE NOTHING MORE THAN A LUCKY SPECIES OF APE THAT IS TRYING TO UNDERSTAND THE COMPLEXITIES OF CREATION VIA A LANGUAGE THAT EVOLVED IN ORDER TO TELL ONE ANOTHER WHERE THE RIPE FRUIT WAS?

Fighting for breath, the philosopher managed to say Don't be silly.

THE REMARK WAS NOT INTENDED AS DEROGATORY, said Death. UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES, YOU HAVE ACHIEVED A GREAT DEAL.

We've certainly escaped from outmoded superstitions!

WELL DONE, said Death. THAT'S THE SPIRIT. I JUST WANTED TO CHECK.

He leaned forward.

AND ARE YOU AWARE OF THE THEORY THAT THE STATE OF SOME TINY PARTICLES IS INDETERMINATE UNTIL THE MOMENT THEY ARE OBSERVED? A CAT IN A BOX IS OFTEN MENTIONED.

Oh, yes, said the philosopher.

GOOD, said Death. He got to his feet as the last of the light died, and smiled.

I SEE YOU...

It was a Thursday afternoon. The college council of the Unseen University, Discworld's oldest and most venerable school of wizardry, liked their Thursday afternoon meetings.

The council chamber, with its stained-glass image of Archchancellor Sloman Discovering the Special Theory of Slood, was always nice and warm and there was a distant prospect of tea and chocolate biscuits at half-past three. Pointy hats nodded as the agenda was demolished with due mendacity and sleepy prevarication.

As the biscuit hour approached, Archchancellor Mustrum Ridcully drummed his fingers on the battered leather of the table.

Just one item of Any Other Business, gentlemen, he said. It appears the Lord Vetinari, our gracious ruler, has seen fit to confront us with a little test. Possibly we have annoyed him in some way, committed some little faux pas -  This is about Mayhap Street, isn't it? said the Dean. Still not turned up, has it?

There is nothin' the matter with Mayhap Street, Dean, said Ridcully sharply. It is merely temporarily displaced, that's all. I am assured the rest of the continuum will catch up with it no later than Thursday. It was an accident that was waiting to happen.

Well, only waiting for a thaumic discharge that happened because you said there was no way it could possibly the Dean began. He was clearly enjoying himself.

Dean! We are going to move on and put this behind us! Ridcully snapped.

Excuse me, Archchancellor? said Ponder Stibbons, who was Head of Inadvisably Applied Magic and also the university's Praelector, a position interpreted at UU as the one who gets given the tedious jobs.

Yes, Stibbons?

It may be a good idea to put it behind us before we move on, sir, said Stibbons. That way it will be further behind us when we do, in fact, move.

Good point, that man. See to it, said Ridcully.1 He turned his attention once again to the ominous Manila folder in front of him.

Anyway, gentlemen, his lordship has appointed a Mr A.E. Pessimal, a man of whom I know little, as Inspector of Universities. His job, I suspect, is to drag us kicking and no doubt screamin' into the Century of the Fruitbat.

That was, in fact, the last century, Archchancellor, said Stibbons.

Well, we are hard to drag and very good at kicking, said Ridcully. He has made a few little, ah, suggestions for improvement

Really? This should be fun, said the Dean.

Ridcully slid the folder to his right.

Over to you, Mr Stibbons, he announced.

Yes, Archchancellor. Er thank you. Um. As you know, the city has always waived all taxes on the university

Because they know what would happen if they tried it, said the Dean, with some satisfaction.

Yes, said Stibbons. And, then again, no. I fear we are past the time when a little shape-changing or a couple of fireballs would do the trick.

That is not the modern spirit. It would be a good idea to at least examine Mr Pessimal's suggestions

There was a general shrugging. It would at least pass the time until the tea turned up. The shrugging was particularly marked from the Librarian who, as an orang-utan, had more to shrug.

Firstly, said Stibbons, Mr Pessimal wants to know what we do here.

Do? We are the premier college of magic! said Ridcully.

But do we teach? As such?

Of course, if no alternative presents itself, said the Dean. We show ‘em where the library is, give ‘em a few chats and graduate the survivors. If they run into any problems, my door is always metaphorically open.

Metaphorically, sir? said Stibbons.

Yes, said the Dean. But technically, of course, it's locked. Good grief, you don't want ‘em just turning up.

Explain to him that we don't do things, Stibbons, said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. We are academics.

Interesting idea, though, said Ridcully, winking at Stibbons. What do you do, Senior Wrangler?

A hunted look crossed the Senior Wrangler's face. Well, er, he said, clearing his throat, The post of Senior Wrangler at Unseen University is, most unusually -  Yes, but what do you do ? And have you been doing more of it in the past six months than in the previous six?

Well, if we're asking that kind of question, Archchancellor, what do you do? said the Dean, testily.

I administer, Dean, said Ridcully, calmly.

Then we must be doing something , otherwise you'd have nothing to administrate.

That comment strikes at the very heart of the bureaucratic principle, Dean, and I shall ignore it.

You see, Mr Pessimal wonders why we don't publish the results of, er, whatever it is we do, said Ponder.

Publish? said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

Results? said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

Ook? said the Librarian.

Braseneck College publishes their Journal of Irreducible Research four times a year now, said Stibbons meekly.

Yes. Six copies, said Ridcully.

No wizard worth his salt tells other wizards what he's up to! snapped the Lecturer in Recent Runes. Besides, how can you measure thinking? You can count the tables a carpenter makes, but what kind of rule could measure the amount of thought necessary to define the essence of tableosity?

Exactly! said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. I myself have been working on my Theory of Anything for 15 years! The amount of thought that has gone into it is astonishing! Those 67 pages have been hard won, I can tell you!

And I've seen some of those Braseneck papers, said Ridcully. They've got titles like ‘Diothumatic Aspects of Cheese in Mice', or possibly it was mice in cheese. Or maybe chess.

And what was it about? said the Dean.

Oh, I don't think it was for reading. It was for having written, said the Archchancellor. Anyway, no one knows what diothumics is, except that it's probably magic with the crusts cut off. Braseneck College, indeed! It used to be the Braseneck School of Conjuring!

Er nevertheless, Mr Pessimal does point out that Braseneck is attracting students, to the general benefit of the city, said Stibbons. In fact he suggests that we ourselves might even consider, er, advertising for students.

He paused, because of the sudden frigid quality of the atmosphere, then plunged on In order to attract young men, in fact, who would not normally consider wizarding as a profession. He notes that Braseneck gives all new students a free crystal ball and a voucher for a free frog or frog-like creature.

Make ourselves attractive to students? said the Archchancellor. Mr Stibbons, the whole idea of a university is that it should be hard to get into. Remember Dean Rouster? He used to set traps to stop students attending his lectures! ‘I'll tap talent from all backgrounds,' he used to say, ‘but a lad who can't spot a tripwire is no good to me!' He reckoned any student who didn't open a door very carefully and look where he was putting his feet would only be a burden to the profession. You see, trying to be nice to students means you end up with courses like comparative fretwork and graduates who think ‘thank you' is one word and can look at a sign sayin' ‘Human Resources Department' without detecting a whiff of brimstone.

I have to tell you, sir, that Mr Pessimal is suggesting that we accept an intake of 40 per cent non-traditional students, said Ponder Stibbons.

What does that mean? said the Senior Wrangler.

Well, er Stibbons began, but the council had already resorted to definition-by-hubbub.

We take in all sorts as it is, said the Dean.

Does he mean people who are not traditionally good at magic? said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

Ridiculous! said the Dean. Forty per cent duffers?

Exactly! said the Archchancellor. That means we'd have to find enough clever people to make up over half the student intake! We'd never manage it. If they were clever already, they wouldn't need to go to university! No, we'll stick to an intake of 100 per cent young fools, thank you. Bring ‘em in stupid, send them away clever, that's the UU way!

Some of them arrive thinkin' they're clever, of course, said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

Yes, but we soon disabuse them of that, said the Dean happily. What is a university for if it isn't to tell you that everything you think you know is wrong?

Well put, that man! said Ridcully. Ignorance is the key! That's how the Dean got where he is today!

Thank you, Archchancellor, said the Dean, in a chilly voice. I shall take that as a compliment. Carefully directed ignorance is the key to all knowledge.

I think the inspector actually means people who by accident of birth, upbringing, background or early education would not meet the usual entrance requirements, said Ponder, quickly.

Really? Good idea, said Ridcully, a gleam in his eye. And are we to take it that for his part he intends to make a point of hirin' clerks who aren't very good at sums and file everythin' under ‘S' for ‘stuff'?

He doesn't appear to say so -  How strange. Oh, I can see what he's getting at, but, you see, we're a university, Mr Stibbons, not a bandage. We can't just wave a magic wand and make everything better!

Actually, sir Stibbons began.

Ridcully waved a hand irritably. Yes, yes, all right, I know, we can just wave a magic wand and make everything better. Except, of course, that making everything better by magic only makes things much, much worse. What we do , gentlemen, is dynamically refrain from using magic. Just imagine what we could do if we turned our uh, intellects to the political stage.

I'm only surprised that he's not asking us to do so.

Interestingly, he does want to know if we have an ethics committee, said Stibbons.

Since we don't have any, I don't think we need one, said Ridcully.

It appears to be to do with experiments on animals, Stibbons persisted.

Ook?

Quite so, said Ridcully. Why would we do that sort of nastiness when we've got students hangin' around? I was turned into something miscellaneous at least once a week in my first year, and it never did me any harm. Anything else?

Lots, sir, sighed Stibbons. Lots and lots.

A pall descended.

Well gentlemen, I think I can gauge the sense of the meeting, said the Archchancellor, to break the silence. I propose that we inform the inspector that we are giving his suggestions our urgent consideration.

They looked up in horror. He winked. They relaxed.

That's right! said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. In depth!

Abyssal! said the Dean.

We'll form a committee! said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

I'm sure Mr Pessimal will be very pleased to hear it, said Ridcully. Put it on the agenda for this time next year, Mr Stibbons, will you? No, perhaps the year after next. Yes, that might be better. You can't hurry urgency, I've always said so.

Upon which happy note, as if by magic, the tea and biscuits arrived.

 Prologue

 In a distant and second-hand set of dimensions, in an astral plane that was never meant to fly, the curling
star-mists waver and part
 See
 Great A'Tuin the turtle comes, swimming slowly through the interstellar gulf, hydrogen frost on his
ponderous limbs, his huge and ancient shell pocked with meteor craters. Through sea-sized eyes that are
crusted with rheum and asteroid dust He stares fixedly at the Destination.
 In a brain bigger than a city, with geological slowness, He thinks only of the Weight.
 Most of the weight is of course accounted for by Berilia, Tubul, Great T'Phon and Jerakeen, the four
giant elephants upon whose broad and startanned shoulders the disc of the World rests, garlanded by the
long waterfall at its vast circumference and domed by the baby-blue vault of Heaven.
 Astropsychology has been, as yet, unable to establish what they think about.
 The Great Turtle was a mere hypothesis until the day the small and secretive kingdom of Krull, whose
rim-most mountains project out over the Rimfall, built a gantry and pulley arrangement at the tip of the
most precipitous crag and lowered several observers over the Edge in a quartzwindowed brass vessel to
peer through the mist veils.
 The early astrozoologists, hauled back from their long dangle by enormous teams of slaves, were able to
bring back much information about the shape and nature of A'Tuin and the elephants but this did not
resolve fundamental questions about the nature and purpose of the universe.
 For example, what was Atuin's actual sex? This vital question, said the Astrozoologists with mounting
authority, would not be answered until a larger and more powerful gantry was constructed for a
deep-space vessel. In the meantime they could only speculate about the revealed cosmos.
 There was, for example, the theory that A'Tuin had come from nowhere and would continue at a uniform
crawl, or steady gait, into nowhere, for all time. This theory was popular among academics. An
alternative, favoured by those of a religious persuasion, was that A'Tuin was crawling from the Birthplace
to the Time of Mating, as were all the stars in the sky which were, obviously, also carried by giant turtles.
When they arrived they would briefly and passionately mate, for the first and only time, and from that
fiery union new turtles would be born to carry a new pattern of worlds. This was known as the Big Bang
hypothesis.
 Thus it was that a young cosmochelonian of the Steady Gait faction, testing a new telescope with which
he hoped to make measurements of the precise albedo of Great A'Tuin's right eye, was on this eventful
evening the first outsider to see the smoke rise hubward from the burning of the oldest city in the world.
 Later that night he became so engrossed in his studies he completely forgot about it. Nevertheless, he
was the first. There were others

 The Colour of Magic

 Fire roared through the bifurcated city of Ankh-Morpork. Where it licked the Wizards' Quarter it
burned blue and green and was even laced with strange sparks of the eighth colour, octarine; where its
outriders found their way into the vats and oil stores all along Merchants Street it progressed in a series
of blazing fountains and explosions; in the Streets of the perfume blenders it burned with a sweetness;
where it touched bundles of rare and dry herbs in the storerooms of the drugmasters it made men go mad
and talk to God.
 By now the whole of downtown Ankh-Morpork was alight, and the richer and worthier citizens of Ankh
on the far bank were bravely responding to the situation by feverishly demolishing the bridges. But
already the ships in the Morpork docks - laden with grain, cotton and timber, and coated with tar - were
blazing merrily and, their moorings burnt to ashes, were breasting the river Ankh on the ebb tide, igniting
riverside palaces and bowers as they drifted like drowning fireflies towards the sea. In any case, sparks
were riding the breeze and touching down far across the river in hidden gardens and remote brickyards.
The smoke from the merry burning rose miles high, in a wind-sculpted black column that could be seen
across the whole of the Discworld. It was certainly impressive from the cool, dark hilltop a few leagues
away, where two figures were watching with considerable interest.
 The taller of the pair was chewing on a chicken leg and leaning on a sword that was only marginally
shorter than the average man. If it wasn't for the air of wary intelligence about him it might have been
supposed that he was a barbarian from the hubland wastes.
 His partner was much shorter and wrapped from head to toe in a brown cloak. Later, when he has
occasion to move, it will be seen that he moves lightly, cat-like.
 The two had barely exchanged a word in the last twenty minutes except for a short and inconclusive
argument as to whether a particularly powerful explosion had been the oil bond store or the workshop of
Kerible the Enchanter. Money hinged on the fact.
 Now the big man finished gnawing at the bone and tossed it into the grass, smiling ruefully.
 There go all those little alleyways, he said. I liked them.
 All the treasure houses, said the small man. He added thoughtfully, Do gems burn, I wonder? 'Tis said
they're kin to coal.
 All the gold, melting and running down the gutters, said the big one, ignoring him. And all the wine,
boiling in the barrels.
 There were rats, said his brown companion.
 Rats, I'll grant you.
 It was no place to be in high summer.
 That, too. One can't help feeling, though, a well, a momentary-
 He trailed off, then brightened. We owed old Fredor at the Crimson Leech eight silver pieces, he
added. The little man nodded.
 They were silent for a while as a whole new series of explosions carved a red line across a hitherto dark
section of the greatest city in the world. Then the big man stirred
 Weasel?
 Yes?
 I wonder who started it?
 The small swordsman known as the Weasel said nothing. He was watching the road in the ruddy light.
Few had come that way since the widershins gate had been one of the first to collapse in a shower of
white-hot embers.
 But two were coming up it now. The Weasel's eyes always at their sharpest in gloom and halflight, made
out the shapes of two mounted men and some sort of low beast behind them. Doubtless a rich merchant
escaping with as much treasure as he could lay frantic hands on. The Weasel said as much to his
companion, who sighed.
 The status of footpad ill suits us, said the barbarian, but as you say, times are hard and there are no
soft beds tonight.
 He shifted his grip on his sword and, as the leading rider drew near, stepped out onto the road with a
hand held up and his face set in a grin nicely calculated to reassure yet threaten.
 Your pardon, sir- he began.
 The rider reined in his horse and drew back his hood. The big man looked into a face blotched with
superficial burns and punctuated by tufts of singed beard. Even the eyebrows had gone.
 Bugger off, said the face. You're Bravd the Hublander, aren't you?
 Bravd became aware that he had fumbled the initiative.
 Just go away, will you? said the rider. I just haven't got time for you, do you understand? He looked
around and added That goes for your shadow-loving fleabag partner too, wherever he's hiding.
 The Weasel stepped up to the horse and peered at the dishevelled figure.
 Why, it's Rincewind the wizard, isn't it? he said in tones of delight, meanwhile filing the wizard's
description of him in his memory for leisurely vengeance. I thought I recognized the voice.
 Bravd spat and sheathed his sword. It was seldom worth tangling with wizards, they so rarely had any
treasure worth speaking of.
 He talks pretty big for a gutter wizard, he muttered.
 You don't understand at all, said the wizard wearily. I'm so scared of you my spine has turned to jelly,
it's just that I'm suffering from an overdose of terror right now. I mean, when I've got over that then I'll
have time to be decently frightened of you.
 The Weasel pointed towards the burning city. You've been through that? he asked.
 The wizard rubbed a red, raw hand across his eyes. I was there when it started. See him? Back there?
He pointed back down the road to where his travelling companion was still approaching, having adopted
a method of riding that involved falling out of the saddle every few seconds.
 Well? said Weasel.
 He started it, said Rincewind simply. Bravd and Weasel looked at the figure, now hopping across the
road with one foot in a stirrup.
 Fire-raiser, is he? said Bravd at last.
 No, said Rincewind. Not precisely. Let's just say that if complete and utter chaos was lightning, then
he'd be the sort to stand on a hilltop in a thunderstorm wearing wet copper armour and shouting All
gods are bastards. Got any food?
 There's some chicken, said Weasel. in exchange for a story.
 What's his name? said Bravd, who tended to lag behind in conversations.
 Twoflower.
 Twoflower? said Bravd. What a funny name.
 You, said Rincewind, dismounting, do not know the half of it. Chicken, you say?
 Devilled, said Weasel. The wizard groaned.
 That reminds me, added the Weasel, snapping his fingers, there was a really big explosion about, oh,
half an hour ago.
 That was the oil bond store going up, said Rincewind, wincing at the memory of the burning rain.
 Weasel turned and grinned expectantly at his companion, who grunted and handed over a coin from his
pouch. Then there was a scream from the roadway, cut off abruptly. Rincewind did not look up from his
chicken.
 One of the things he can't do, he can't ride a horse, he said. Then he stiffened as if sandbagged by a
sudden recollection, gave a small yelp of terror and dashed into the gloom. When he returned, the being
called Twoflower was hanging limply over his shoulder. It was small and skinny, and dressed very oddly
in a pair of knee length britches and a shirt in such a violent and vivid conflict of colours that Weasel's
fastidious eye was offended even in the half-light.
 No bones broken, by the feel of things, said Rincewind. He was breathing heavily. Bravd winked at
the Weasel and went to investigate the shape that they assumed was a pack animal.
 You'd be wise to forget it, said the wizard, without looking up from his examination of the unconscious
Twoflower. Believe me. A power protects it.
 A spell? said Weasel, squatting down.
 No-oo. But magic of a kind, I think. Not the usual sort. I mean, it can turn gold into copper while at the
same time it is still gold, it makes men rich by destroying their possessions, it allows the weak to walk
fearlessly among thieves, it passes through the strongest doors to leach the most protected treasuries.
Even now it has me enslaved - so that I must follow this madman willynilly and protect him from harm.
It's stronger than you, Bravd. It is, I think, more cunning even than you, Weasel.
 What is it called then, this mighty magic?
 Rincewind shrugged. in our tongue it is reflected-sound-as-of-underground-spirits. Is there any wine?
 You must know that I am not without artifice where magic is concerned, said Weasel. only last year
did I– assisted by my friend there – part the notoriously powerful Archmage of Ymitury from his staff, his
belt of moon jewels and his life, in that approximate order. I do not fear this
reflected-sound-of-underground-spirits of which you speak. However, he added, you engage my
interest. Perhaps you would care to tell me more?
 Bravd looked at the shape on the road. It was closer now, and clearer in the pre-dawn light. It looked
for all the world like a–
 A box on legs? he said.
 I'll tell you about it, said Rincewind. if there's any wine, that is.
 Down in the valley there was a roar and a hiss. Someone more thoughtful than the rest had ordered to
be shut the big river gates that were at the point where the Ankh flowed out of the twin city. Denied its
usual egress, the river had burst its banks and was pouring down the fire-ravaged streets. Soon the
continent of flame became a series of islands, each one growing smaller as the dark tide rose. And up
from the city of fumes and smoke rose a broiling cloud of steam, covering the stars. Weasel thought that
it looked like some dark fungus or mushroom.
 The twin city of proud Ankh and pestilent Morpork, of which all the other cities of time and space are,
as it were, mere reflections, has stood many assaults in its long and crowded history and has always risen
to flourish again. So the fire and its subsequent flood, which destroyed everything left that was not
flammable and added a particularly noisome flux to the survivors' problems, did not mark its end. Rather
it was a fiery punctuation mark, a coal-like comma, or salamander semicolon, in a continuing story.
 Several days before these events a ship came up the Ankh on the dawn tide and fetched up, among
many others, in the maze of wharves and docks on the Morpork shore. It carried a cargo of pink pearls,
milk-nuts, pumice, some official letters for the Patrician of Ankh, and a man.
 It was the man who engaged the attention of Blind Hugh, one of the beggars on early duty at Pearl
Dock. He nudged Cripple Wa in the ribs, and pointed wordlessly.
 Now the stranger was standing on the quayside watching several straining seamen carry a large
brass-bound chest down the gangplank. Another man, obviously the captain, was standing beside him.
There was about the seaman - every nerve in Blind Hugh's body, which tended to vibrate in the presence
of even a small amount of impure gold at fifty paces, screamed into his brain - the air of one anticipating
imminent enrichment.
 Sure enough, when the chest had been deposited on the cobbles, the stranger reached into a pouch and
there was the flash of a coin. Several coins. Gold. Blind Hugh, his body twanging like a hazel rod in the
presence of water, whistled to himself. Then he nudged Wa again, and sent him scurrying off down a
nearby alley into the heart of the city. When the captain walked back onto his ship, leaving the newcomer
looking faintly bewildered on the quayside, Blind Hugh snatched up his begging cup and made his way
across the street with an ingratiating leer. At the sight of him the stranger started to fumble urgently with
his money pouch.
 Good day to thee, sire, Blind Hugh began, and found himself looking up into a face with four eyes in it.
He turned to run…
 ! said the stranger, and grabbed his arm. Hugh was aware that the sailors lining the rail of the ship were
laughing at him. At the same time his specialised senses detected an overpowering impression of money.
He froze. The stranger let go and quickly thumbed through a small black book he had taken from his belt.
Then he said Hallo.
 What? said Hugh. The man looked blank.
 Hallo? he repeated, rather louder than necessary and so carefully that Hugh could hear the vowels
tinkling into place.
 Hallo yourself, Hugh riposted. The stranger smiled widely, fumbled yet again in the pouch. This time his
hand came out holding a large gold coin. It was in fact slightly larger than an 8,000-dollar Ankhian crown
and the design on it was unfamiliar, but it spoke inside Hugh's mind in a language he understood perfectly.
My current owner, it said, is in need of succour and assistance; why not give it to him, so you and me can
go off somewhere and enjoy ourselves?
 Subtle changes in the beggar's posture made the stranger feel more at ease. He consulted the small book
again.
 I wish to be directed to an hotel, tavern, lodging house, inn, hospice, caravanserai, he said.
 What, all of them? said Hugh, taken aback.
 ? said the stranger.
 Hugh was aware that a small crowd of fishwives, shellfish diggers and freelance gawpers were watching
them with interest.
 Look, he said, I know a good tavern, is that enough? He shuddered to think of the gold coin
escaping from his life. He'd keep that one, even if Ymor confiscated all the rest. And the big chest that
comprised most of the newcomer's luggage looked to be full of gold, Hugh decided. The four-eyed man
looked at his book.
 I would like to be directed to an hotel, place of repose, tavern, a–
 Yes, all right. Come on then, said Hugh hurriedly. He picked up one of the bundles and walked away
quickly. The stranger, after a moment's hesitation, strolled after him.
 A train of thought shunted its way through Hugh's mind. Getting the newcomer to the Broken Drum so
easily was a stroke of luck, no doubt of it, and Ymor would probably reward him. But for all his new
acquaintance's mildness there was something about him that made Hugh uneasy, and for the life of him he
couldn't figure out what it was. Not the two extra eyes, odd though they were. There was something else.
He glanced back. The little man was ambling along in the middle of the street, looking around him with an
expression of keen interest.
 Something else Hugh saw nearly made him gibber.
 The massive wooden chest, which he had last seen resting solidly on the quayside, was following on its
master's heels with a gentle rocking gait. Slowly, in case a sudden movement on his part might break his
fragile control over his own legs, Hugh bent slightly so that he could see under the chest.
 There were lots and lots of little legs. Very deliberately, Hugh turned around and walked very carefully
towards the Broken Drum.

 Odd, said Ymor.
 He had this big wooden chest, added Cripple Wa.
 He'd have to be a merchant or a spy, said Ymor.
 He pulled a scrap of meat from the cutlet in his hand and tossed it into the air. It hadn't reached the
zenith of its arc, before a black shape detached itself from the shadows in the corner of the room and
swooped down, taking the morsel in mid-air.
 A merchant or a spy, repeated Ymor. I'd prefer a spy. A spy pays for himself twice, because there's
always the reward when we turn him in. What do you think, Withel?
 Opposite Ymor the second greatest thief in Ankh-Morpork half-closed his one eye and shrugged. I've
checked on the ship, he said. it's a freelance trader. Does the occasional run to the Brown islands.
People there are just savages. They don't understand about spies and I expect they eat merchants.
 He looked a bit like a merchant, volunteered Wa. Except he wasn't fat.
 There was a flutter of wings at the window. Ymor shifted his bulk out of the chair and crossed the room,
coming back with a large raven. After he'd unfastened the message capsule from its leg it flew to join its
fellows lurking among the rafters.
 Withel regarded it without love. Ymor's ravens were notoriously loyal to their master, to the extent that
Withel's one attempt to promote himself to the rank of greatest thief in Ankh-Morpork had cost their
master's right hand man his left eye. But not his life, however. Ymor never grudged a man his ambitions.
 B12, said Ymor, tossing the little phial aside and unrolling the tiny scroll within.
 Gorrin the Cat, said Withel automatically. On station up in the gong tower at the Temple of Small
Gods.
 He says Hugh has taken our stranger to the Broken Drum. Well, that's good enough. Broadman is a -
friend of ours, isn't he?
 Aye, said Withel, if he knows what's good for trade.
 Among his customers has been your man Gorrin, said Ymor pleasantly, for he writes here about a box
on legs, if I read this scrawl correctly.
 He looked at Withel over the top of the paper. Withel looked away. He will be disciplined, he said
flatly. Wa looked at the man leaning back in his chair, his black-clad frame resting as nonchalantly as a
Rimland puma on a jungle branch, and decided that Gorrin atop Small Gods temple would soon be
joining those little deities in the multifold dimensions of Beyond. And he owed Wa three copper pieces.
 Ymor crumpled the note and tossed it into a corner. I think we'll wander along to the Drum later on,
Withel. Perhaps, too, we may try this beer that your men find so tempting.
 Withel said nothing. Being Ymor's right-hand man was like being gently flogged to death with scented
bootlaces.

 The twin city of Ankh-Morpork, foremost of all the cities bounding the Circle Sea, was as a matter of
course the home of a large number of gangs, thieves' guilds, syndicates and similar organisations. This
was one of the reasons for its wealth. Most of the humbler folk on the widdershin side of the river, in
Morpork's mazy alleys, supplemented their meagre incomes by filling some small role for one or other of
the competing gangs. So it was that by the time Hugh and Twoflower entered the courtyard of the
Broken Drum the leaders of a number of them were aware that someone had arrived in the city who
appeared to have much treasure. Some reports from the more observant spies included details about a
book that told the stranger what to say, and a box that walked by itself. These facts were immediately
discounted. No magician capable of such enchantments ever came within a mile of Morpork docks.
 It still being that hour when most of the city was just rising or about to go to bed there were few people
in the Drum to watch Twoflower descend the stairs. When the Luggage appeared behind him and started
to lurch confidently down the steps the customers at the rough wooden tables, as one man, looked
suspiciously at their drinks.
 Broadman was browbeating the small troll who swept the bar when the trio walked past him. What in
hell's that? he said.
 Just don't talk about it, hissed Hugh. Twoflower was already thumbing through his book.
 What's he doing? said Broadman, arms akimbo.
 It tells him what to say. I know it sounds ridiculous, muttered Hugh.
 How can a book tell a man what to say?
 I wish for an accommodation, a room, lodgings, the lodging house, full board, are your rooms clean, a
room with a view, what is your rate for one night? said Twoflower in one breath.
 Broadman looked at Hugh. The beggar shrugged.
 He's got plenty money, he said.
 Tell him it's three copper pieces, then. And that thing will have to go in the stable.
 ? said the stranger. Broadman held up three thick red fingers and the man's face was suddenly a sunny
display of comprehension. He reached into his pouch and laid three large gold pieces on Broadman's
palm. Broadman stared at them. They represented about four times the worth of the Broken Drum, Staff
included. He looked at Hugh. There was no help there. He looked at the stranger. He swallowed.
 Yes, he said, in an unnaturally high voice. And then there's meals, o'course. Uh. You understand, yes?
Food. You eat. No? He made the appropriate motions.
 Fut? said the little man.
 Yes, said Broadman, beginning to sweat. Have a look in your little book, I should.
 The man opened the book and ran a finger down one page. Broadman, who could read after a fashion,
peered over the top of the volume. What he saw made no sense.
 Fooood, said the stranger. Yes. Cutlet, hash chop, stew, ragout, fricassee, mince, collops, souffle,
dumpling, blancmange, sorbet, gruel, sausage, not to have a sausage, beans, without a hear, kickshaws,
jelly, jam. Giblets. He beamed at Broadman.
 All that? said the innkeeper weakly.
 It's just the way he talks, said Hugh, Don't ask me why. He just does.
 All eyes in the room were watching the stranger–except for a pair belonging to Rincewind the wizard,
who was sitting in the darkest corner nursing a mug of very small beer.
 He was watching the Luggage.
 Watch Rincewind.
 Look at him. Scrawny, like most wizards, and clad in a dark red robe on which a few mystic sigils were
embroidered in tarnished sequins. Some might have taken him for a mere apprentice enchanter who had
run away from his master out of defiance, boredom, fear and a lingering taste for heterosexuality. Yet
around his neck was a chain bearing the bronze octagon that marked him as an alumnus of Unseen
University, the high school of magic whose time-and-space transcendent campus is never precisely Here
or There. Graduates were usually destined for mageship at least, but Rincewind - after an unfortunate
event - had left him knowing only one spell and made a living of sorts around the town by capitalising on
an innate gift for languages. He avoided work as a rule, but had a quickness of wit that put his
acquaintances in mind of a bright rodent. And he knew sapient pearwood when he saw it. He was seeing
it now, and didn't quite believe it.
 An archmage, by dint of great effort and much expenditure of time, might eventually obtain a small staff
made from the timber of the sapient peartree. It grew only on the sites of ancient magic–there were
probably no more than two such staffs in all the cities of the circle sea. A large chest of it Rincewind
tried to work it out, and decided that even if the box were crammed with star opals and sticks of
auricholatum the contents would not be worth one-tenth the price of the container. A vein started to
throb in his forehead.
 He stood up and made his way to the trio.
 May I be of assistance? he ventured.
 Shove off, Rincewind, snarled Broadman.
 I only thought it might be useful to address this gentleman in his own tongue, said the wizard gently.
He's doing all right on his own, said the innkeeper, but took a few steps backward. Rincewind smiled
politely at the stranger and tried a few words of Chimeran. He prided himself on his fluency in the tongue,
but the stranger only looked bemused.
 It won't work, said Hugh knowledgeably, it's the book, you see. It tells him what to say. Magic.
 Rincewind switched to High Borogravian, to Vanglemesht, Sumtri and even Black Oroogu, the language
with no nouns and only one adjective, which is obscene. Each was met with polite incomprehension. In
desperation he tried heathen Trob, and the little man's face split into a delighted grin.
 At last! he said. My good sir! This is remarkable! (Although in Trob the last word in fact became a
thing which may happen but once in the usable lifetime of a canoe hollowed diligently by axe and fire from
the tallest diamondwood tree that grows in the noted diamondwood forests on the lower Slopes of
Mount Awayawa, home of the firegods or so it is said.).
 What was all that? said Broadman suspiciously.
 What did the innkeeper say? said the little man.
 Rincewind swallowed. Broadman, he said. Two mugs of your best ale, please.
 You can understand him?
 Oh, sure.
 Tell him tell him he's very welcome. Tell him breakfast is - uh - one gold piece. For a moment
Broadman's face looked as though some vast internal struggle was going on, and then he added with a
burst of generosity. I'll throw in yours, too.
 Stranger, said Rincewind levelly. if you stay here you will be knifed or poisoned by nightfall. But don't
stop smiling, or so will I.
 Oh, come now, said the stranger, looking around.
 This looks like a delightful place. A genuine Morporkean tavern. I've heard so much about them, you
know. All these quaint old beams. And so reasonable, too.
 Rincewind glanced around quickly, in case some leakage of enchantment from the Magician's Quarter
across the river had momentarily transported them to some other place. No - this was still the interior of
the Drum, its walls stained with smoke, its floor a compost of old rushes and nameless beetles, its sour
beer not so much purchased as merely hired for a while. He tried to fit the image around the word
quaint, or rather the nearest Trob equivalent, which was that pleasant oddity of design found in the little
coral houses of the sponge-eating pigmies on the Orohai peninsular.
 His mind reeled back from the effort. The visitor went on, My name is Twoflower, and extended his
hand. Instinctively, the other three looked down to see if there was a coin in it.
 Pleased to meet you, said Rincewind. I'm Rincewind. Look, I wasn't joking. This is a tough place.
 Good! Exactly what I wanted!
 Eh?
 What is this stuff in the mugs?
 This? Beer. Thanks, Broadman. Yes. Beer. You know. Beer.
 Ah, the so-typical drink. A small gold piece will be sufficient payment, do you think? I do not want to
cause offense.
 It was already half out of his purse.
 Yarrt, croaked Rincewind. I mean, no, it won't cause Offense.
 Good. You say this is a tough place. Frequented, you mean, by heroes and men of adventure?
 Rincewind considered this. Yes? he managed.
 Excellent. I would like to meet some.
 An explanation occurred to the wizard. Ah, he said. You've come to hire mercenaries (warriors who
fight for the tribe with most milknut-meal)?
 Oh no. I just want to meet them. So that when I get home I can say that I did it.
 Rincewind thought that a meeting with most of the Drum's clientele would mean that Twoflower never
went home again, unless he lived downriver and happened to float past.
 Where is your home? he inquired.
 Broadman had slipped away into some back room, he noticed. Hugh was watching them suspiciously
from a nearby table.
 Have you heard of the city of Des Palargic?
 Well, I didn't spend much time in Trob. I was just passing through, you know-
 Oh, it's not in Trob. I speak Trob because there are many beTrobi sailors in our ports. Des Palargic is
the major seaport of the Agatean Empire.
 Never heard of it, I'm afraid.
 Twoflower raised his eyebrows. No? It is quite big. You sail turnwise from the Brown Islands for about
a week and there it is. Are you all right? He hurried around the table and patted the wizard on the back.
Rincewind choked on his beer–The Counterweight Continent!

 Three streets away an old man dropped a coin into a saucer of acid and swirled it gently. Broadman
waited impatiently, ill at ease in a room made noisome by vats and bubbling beakers and lined with
shelves containing shadowy shapes suggestive of skulls and stuffed impossibilities.
 Well? he demanded.
 One cannot hurry these things, said the old alchemist peevishly. Assaying takes time. Ah. He
prodded the saucer, where the coin now lay in a swirl of green colour. He made some calculations on a
scrap of parchment.
 Exceptionally interesting, he said at last.
 Is it genuine?
 The old man pursed his lips. it depends on how you define the term, he said. if you mean is this coin
the same as, say, a fifty-dollar piece, then the answer is no.
 I knew it, screamed the innkeeper, and started towards the door.
 I'm not sure that I'm making myself clear, said the alchemist. Broadman turned round angrily.
 What do you mean?
 Well, you see, what with one thing and another our coinage has been somewhat watered, over the
years. The gold content of the average coin is barely four parts in twelve, the balance being made up of
silver, copper-
 What of it?
 I said this coin isn't like ours. It is pure gold.
 After Broadman had left, at a run, the alchemist spent some time staring at the ceiling. Then he drew out
a very small piece of thin parchment, rummaged for a pen amongst the debris on his workbench, and
wrote a very short, small, message. Then he went over to his cages of white doves, black cockerels and
other laboratory animals. From one cage he removed a glossy coated rat, rolled the parchment into the
phial attached to a hind leg, and let the animal go.
 It sniffed around the floor for a moment, then disappeared down a hole in the far wall. At about this time
a hitherto unsuccessful fortune-teller living on the other side of the block chanced to glance into her
scrying bowl, gave a small scream and, within the hour, had sold her jewellery, various magical
accoutrements, most of her clothes and almost all her other possessions that could not be conveniently
carried on the fastest horse she could buy. The fact that later on, when her house collapsed in flames, she
herself died in a freak landslide in the Morpork Mountains, proves that Death, too, has a sense of
humour.
 Also at about the same moment as the homing rat disappeared into the maze of runs under the city,
scurrying along in faultless obedience to an ancient instinct, the Patrician of Ankh-Morpork picked up the
letters delivered that morning by albatross. He looked pensively at the topmost one again, and summoned
his chief of spies.

 And in the Broken Drum Rincewind was listening open-mouthed as Twoflower talked.
 So I decided to see for myself, the little man was saying. Eight years' saving up, this has cost me. But
worth every half-rhinu. I mean, here I am. In Ankh-Morpork. Famed in song and story, I mean. In the
streets that have known the tread of Hemic Whiteblade. Hrun the Barbarian, and Bravd the Hublander
and the Weasel It's all just like I imagined, you know.
 Rincewind's face was a mask of fascinated horror.
 I just couldn't stand it any more back in Des Pelargic, Twoflower went on blithely, sitting at a desk all
day, just adding up columns of figures, just a pension to look forward to at the end of it where's the
romance in that? Twoflower, I thought, it's now or never. You don't just have to listen to stories. You can
go there. Now's the time to stop hanging around the docks listening to sailors' tales. So I compiled a
phrase book and bought a passage on the next ship to the Brown Islands.
 No guards? murmured Rincewind.
 No. Why? What have I got that's worth stealing?
 Rincewind coughed. You have, uh, gold, he said.
 Barely two thousand rhinu. Hardly enough to keep a man alive for more than a month or two. At home,
that is. I imagine they might stretch a bit further here.
 Would a rhinu be one of those big gold coins? said Rincewind.
 Yes. Twoflower looked worriedly at the wizard over the top of his strange seeing-lenses. Will two
thousand be sufficient, do you think?
 Yarrrt, croaked Rincewind. I mean, yes sufficient . 
 Good.
 Um. Is everyone in the Agatean Empire as rich as you?
 Me? Rich? Bless you, whatever put that idea into your head? I am but a poor clerk! Did I pay the
innkeeper too much, do you think? Twoflower added.
 Uh. He might have settled for less, Rincewind conceded.
 Ah. I shall know better next time. I can see I have a lot to learn. An idea occurs to me. Rincewind
would you perhaps consent to be employed as a, I don't know, perhaps the word guide would fit the
circumstances? I think I could afford to pay you a rhinu a day.
 Rincewind opened his mouth to reply but felt the words huddle together in his throat, reluctant to emerge
in a world that was rapidly going mad. Twoflower blushed.
 I have offended you, he said. it was an impertinent request to make of a professional man such as
yourself. Doubtless you have many projects you wish to return to- some works of high magic, no
doubt
 No, said Rincewind faintly. Not just at present. A rhinu, you say? One a day. Every day?
 I think perhaps in the circumstances I should make it one and one-half rhinu per day. Plus any
out-of-pocket expenses, of course.
 The wizard rallied magnificently. That will be fine, he Said. Great.
 Twoflower reached into his pouch and took out a large round gold object, glanced at it for a moment,
and slipped it back. Rincewind didn't get a chance to see it properly.
 I think, said the tourist, that I would like a little sleep now. It was a long crossing. And then perhaps
you would care to call back at noon and we can take a look at the city.
 Sure.
 Then please be good enough to ask the innkeeper to Show me to my room.
 Rincewind did so, and watched the nervous Broadman, who had arrived at a gallop from some back
room, lead the way up the wooden steps behind the bar. After a few seconds the luggage got up and
pattered across the floor after them. Then the wizard looked down at the six big coins in his hand.
Twoflower had insisted on paying his first four days' wages in advance. Hugh nodded and smiled
encouragingly.
 Rincewind snarled at him.
 As a student wizard Rincewind had never achieved high marks in precognition, but now unused circuits
in his brain were throbbing and the future might as well have been engraved in bright colours on his
eyeballs. The space between his shoulder blades began to itch. The sensible thing to do, he knew, was to
buy a horse. It would have to be a fast one, and expensive - offhand, Rincewind couldn't think of any
horse-dealer he knew who was rich enough to give change out of almost a whole ounce of gold.
 And then, of course, the other five coins would help him set up a useful practice at some safe distance,
say two hundred miles. That would be the sensible thing.
 But what would happen to Twoflower, all alone in a city where even the cockroaches had an unerring
instinct for gold? A man would have to be a real heel to leave him.

 The Patrician of Ankh-Morpork smiled, but with his mouth only.
 The Hub Gate, you say? he murmured.
 The guard captain saluted smartly. Aye, lord. We had to shoot the horse before he would stop.
 Which, by a fairly direct route, brings you here, said the Patrician, looking down at Rincewind.
 And what have you got to say for yourself?
 It was rumoured that an entire wing of the Patrician's palace was filled with clerks who spent their days
collating and updating all the information collected by their master's exquisitely organized spy system.
Rincewind didn't doubt it. He glanced towards the balcony that ran down one side of the audience room.
A sudden run, a nimble jump – a sudden hail of crossbow quarrels. He shuddered. The Patrician cradled
his chins in a beringed hand, and regarded the wizard with eyes as small and hard as beads.
 Let me see, he said. Oathbreaking, the theft of a horse, uttering false coinage - yes, I think it's the
Arena for you, Rincewind.
 This was too much.
 I didn't steal the horse! I bought it fairly!
 But with false coinage. Technical theft, you see.
 But those rhinu are solid gold!
 Rhinu? The Patrician rolled one of them around in his thick fingers. is that what they are called? How
interesting. But, as you point out, they are not very similar to dollars
 Well, of course they're not-
 Ah you admit it, then?
 Rincewind opened his mouth to speak, thought better of it, and shut it again.
 Quite so. And on top of these there is, of course, the moral obloquy attendant on the cowardly betrayal
of a visitor to this shore. For shame, Rincewind! The Patrician waved a hand vaguely. The guards
behind Rincewind backed away, and their captain took a few paces to the right. Rincewind suddenly felt
very alone.
 It is said that when a wizard is about to die Death himself turns up to claim him (instead of delegating the
task to a subordinate, such as Disease or Famine, as is usually the case). Rincewind looked around
nervously for a tall figure in black( wizards, even failed wizards, have in addition to rods and cones in
their eyeballs the tiny octagons that enable them to see into the far octarine, the basic colour of which all
other colours are merely pale shadows impinging on normal four-dimensional space. It is said to be a sort
of fluorescent greenish-yellow purple).
 Was that a flickering shadow in the corner?
 Of course, said the Patrician, I could be merciful. The shadow disappeared. Rincewind looked up an
expression of insane hope on his face.
 Yes? he said.
 The Patrician waved a hand again. Rincewind saw the guards leave the chamber. Alone with the lord of
the twin cities, he almost wished they would come back.
 Come hither, Rincewind, said the Patrician. He indicated a bowl of savouries on a low onyx table by
the throne. Would you care for a crystallised jellyfish? No?
 Um, said Rincewind, no.
 Now I want you to listen very carefully to what I am about to say, said the Patrician amiably,
otherwise you will die. In an interesting fashion. Over a period. Please stop fidgetting like that. Since you
are a wizard of sorts, you are of course aware that we live upon a world shaped, as it were, like a disc?
And that there is said to exist, towards the far rim, a continent which though small is equal in weight to all
the mighty landmasses in this hemicircle? And that this, according to ancient legend, is because it is largely
made of gold?
 Rincewind nodded. Who hadn't heard of the Counterweight Continent? Some sailors even believed the
childhood tales and sailed in search of it. Of course, they returned either empty handed or not at all.
Probably eaten by giant turtles, in the opinion of more serious mariners. Because, of course, the
Counterweight Continent was nothing more than a solar myth.
 It does, of course, exist, said the Patrician. Although it is not made of gold, it is true that gold is a very
common metal there. Most of the mass is made up by vast deposits of octiron deep within the crust.
Now it will be obvious to an incisive mind like yours that the existence of the Counterweight Continent
poses a deadly threat to our people here– he paused, looking at Rincewind's open mouth. He sighed.
He said, Do you by some chance fail to follow me?
 Yarrg, said Rincewind. He swallowed, and licked his lips. I mean, no. I mean - well, gold
 I see, said the Patrician sweetly. You feel, perhaps, that it would be a marvellous thing to go to the
Counterweight Continent and bring back a shipload of gold?
 Rincewind had a feeling that some sort of trap was being set.
 Yes? he ventured.
 And if every man on the shores of the Circle Sea had a mountain of gold of his own? Would that be a
good thing? What would happen? – think carefully. Rincewind's brow furrowed. He thought. We'd all
be rich?
 The way the temperature fell at his remark told him that it was not the correct one.
 I may as well tell you, Rincewind, that there is some contact between the Lords of the Circle Sea and
the Emperor of the Agatean Empire, as it is styled, the Patrician went on. It is only very slight. There is
little common ground between us. We have nothing they want, and they have nothing we can afford. It is
an old Empire, Rincewind. Old and cunning and cruel and very, very rich. So we exchange fraternal
greetings by albatross mail. At infrequent intervals.
 One such letter arrived this morning. A subject of the Emperor appears to have taken it into his head to
visit our city. It appears he wishes to look at it. Only a madman would possibly undergo all the privations
of crossing the Turnwise Ocean in order to merely look at anything. However, he landed this morning.
He might have met a great hero, or the cunningest of thieves, or some wise and great sage. He met you.
He has employed you as a guide. You will be a guide, Rincewind, to this looker, this Twoflower. You
will see that he returns home with a good report of our little homeland. What do you say to that?
 Er. Thank you, lord, said Rincewind miserably.
 There is another point, of course. It would be a tragedy should anything untoward happen to our little
visitor. It would be dreadful if he were to die, for example. Dreadful for the whole of our land, because
the Agatean Emperor looks after his own and could certainly extinguish us at a nod. A mere nod. And
that would be dreadful for you, Rincewind, because in the weeks that remained before the Empire's huge
mercenary fleet arrived certain of my servants would occupy themselves about your person in the hope
that the avenging captains, on their arrival, might find their anger tempered by the sight of your still-living
body. There are certain spells that can prevent the life departing from a body, be it never so abused, andI
see by your face that understanding dawns?
 Yarrg.
 I beg your pardon?
 Yes, lord. I'll, er, see to it, I mean, I'll endeavour to see, I mean, well, I'll try to look after him and see
he comes to no harm. And after that I'll get a job juggling snowballs through Hell, he added bitterly in the
privacy of his own skull.
 Capital! I gather already that you and Twoflower are on the best of terms. An excellent beginning!
When he returns safely to his homeland you will not find me ungrateful. I shall probably even dismiss the
charges against you. Thank you, Rincewind. You may go.
 Rincewind decided not to ask for the return of his five remaining rhinu. He backed away, cautiously.
 Oh, and there is one other thing, the Patrician said, as the wizard groped for the door handles.
 Yes, lord? he replied, with a sinking heart.
 I'm sure you won't dream of trying to escape from your obligations by fleeing the city. I judge you to be
a born city person. But you may be sure that the lords of the other cities will be appraised of these
conditions by nightfall.
 I assure you the thought never even crossed my mind, lord.
 Indeed? Then if I were you I'd sue my face for slander.

 Rincewind reached the Broken Drum at a dead run and was just in time to collide with a man who came
out backwards, fast. The stranger's haste was in part accounted for by the spear in his chest. He bubbled
noisily and dropped dead at the wizard's feet. Rincewind peered around the doorframe and jerked back
as a heavy throwing axe whirred past like a partridge. It was probably a lucky throw, a second cautious
glance told him. The dark interior of the Drum was a broil of fighting men, quite a number of them - a
third and longer glance confirmed - in bits. Rincewind swayed back as a wildly thrown stool sailed past
and smashed on the far side of the street.
 Then he dived in.
 He was wearing a dark robe, made darker by constant wear and irregular washings. In the raging gloom
no-one appeared to notice a shadowy shape that shuffled desperately from table to table. At one point a
fighter, staggering back, trod on what felt like fingers. A number of what felt like teeth bit his ankle. He
yelped shrilly and dropped his guard just sufficiently for a sword, swung by a surprised opponent, to
skewer him.
 Rincewind reached the stairway, sucking his bruised hand and running with a curious, bent-over gait. A
crossbow quarrel thunked into the banister rail above him, and he gave a whimper. He made the stairs in
one breathless rush, expecting at any moment another, more accurate shot.
 In the corridor above he stood upright, gasping and saw the floor in front of him scattered with bodies.
A big black-bearded man, with a bloody sword in one hand, was trying a door handle.
 Hey! screamed Rincewind. The man looked around and then, almost absent-mindedly, drew a short
throwing knife from his bandolier and hurled it. Rincewind ducked. There was a brief scream behind him
as the crossbow man, sighting down his weapon, dropped it and clutched at his throat.
 The big man was already reaching for another knife. Rincewind looked around wildly, and then with wild
improvisation drew himself up into a wizardly pose.
 His hand was flung back. Asoniti! Kyoruchal Beazleblor! 
 The man hesitated, his eyes flicking nervously from side to side as he waited for the magic. The
conclusion that there was not going to be any hit him at the same time as Rincewind, whirring wildly down
the passage, kicked him sharply in the groin. As he screamed and clutched at himself the wizard dragged
open the door, sprang inside, slammed it behind him and threw his body against it, panting.
 It was quiet in here. There was Twoflower, sleeping peacefully on the bed. And there, at the foot of the
bed, was the Luggage.
 Rincewind took a few steps forward, cupidity moving him as easily as if he were on little wheels. The
chest was open. There were bags inside, and in one of them he caught the gleam of gold. For a moment
greed overcame caution, and he reached out gingerly but what was the use? He'd never live to enjoy it.
Reluctantly he drew his hand back, and was surprised to see a slight tremor in the chest's open lid.
Hadn't it shifted slightly, as though rocked by the wind?
 Rincewind looked at his fingers, and then at the lid. It looked heavy, and was bound with brass bands. It
was quite still now. What wind?
 Rincewind!
 Twoflower sprang off the bed. The wizard jumped back, wrenching his features into a smile.
 My dear chap, right on time! We'll just have lunch, and then I'm sure you've got a wonderful
programme lined up for this afternoon.
 That's great, Rincewind took a deep breath. look, he said desperately, let's eat somewhere else.
There's been a bit of a fight down below.
 A tavern brawl? Why didn't you wake me up?
 Well, you see, I – what?
 I thought I made myself clear this morning, Rincewind. I want to see genuine Morporkian life–the slave
market, the Whore Pits, the Temple of Small Gods, the Beggars' Guild and a genuine tavern brawl. A
faint note of suspicion entered Twoflower's voice. You do have them, don't you? You know, people
swinging on chandeliers, swordfights over the table, the sort of thing Hrun the Barbarian and the Weasel
are always getting involved in. You know - excitement.
 Rincewind sat down heavily on the bed.
 You want to see a fight? he said.
 Yes. What's wrong with that?
 For a start, people get hurt.
 Oh, I wasn't suggesting we get involved. I just want to see one, that's all. And some of your famous
heroes. You do have some, don't you? It's not all dockside talk? And now, to the wizard's
astonishment, Twoflower was almost pleading.
 Oh, yeah. We have them all right, said Rincewind hurriedly. He pictured them in his mind, and recoiled
from the thought.
 All the heroes of the Circle Sea passed through the gates of Ankh-Morpork sooner or later. Most of
them were from the barbaric tribes nearer the frozen Hub, which had a sort of export trade in heroes
Almost all of them had crude magic swords, whose unsuppressed harmonics on the astral plane played
hell with any delicate experiments in applied sorcery for miles around, but Rincewind didn't object to
them on that score. He knew himself to be a magical dropout, so it didn't bother him that the mere
appearance of a hero at the city gates was enough to cause retorts to explode and demons to materialise
all through the Magical Quarter. No, what he didn't like about heroes was that they were usually
suicidally gloomy when sober and homicidally insane when drunk. There were too many of them, too.
Some of the most notable questing grounds near the city were a veritable hubbub in the season. There
was talk of organizing a rota.
 He rubbed his nose. The only heroes he had much time for were Bravd and the Weasel, who were out
of town at the moment, and Hrun the Barbarian, who was practically an academic by Hub standards in
that he could think without moving his lips. Hrun was said to be roving somewhere Turnwise.
 Look, he said at last. have you ever met a barbarian?
 Twoflower shook his head.
 I was afraid of that, said Rincewind. Well. they're–
 There was a clatter of running feet in the street outside and a fresh uproar from downstairs. It was
followed by a commotion on the stairs. The door was flung open before Rincewind could collect himself
sufficiently to make a dash for the window. But instead of the greed-crazed madman he expected, he
found himself looking into the round red face of a Sergeant of the Watch. He breathed again. Of course.
The Watch were always careful not to intervene too soon in any brawl where the odds were not heavily
stacked in their favour. The job carried a pension, and attracted a cautious, thoughtful kind of man.
 The Sergeant glowered at Rincewind, and then peered at Twoflower with interest.
 Everything all right here, then? he said.
 Oh, fine, said Rincewind. got held up, did you?
 The sergeant ignored him. This the foreigner? he inquired.
 We were just leaving, said Rincewind quickly, and switched to Trob. Twoflower, I think we ought to
get lunch somewhere else. I know some places.
 He marched out into the corridor with as much aplomb as he could muster. Twoflower followed, and a
few seconds later there was a strangling sound from the sergeant as the luggage closed its lid with a snap,
stood up, stretched, and marched after them.
 Watchmen were dragging bodies out of the room downstairs. There were no survivors. The Watch had
ensured this by giving them ample time to escape via the back door, a neat compromise between caution
and justice that benefited all parties.
 Who are all these men? said Twoflower.
 Oh, you know. Just men, said Rincewind. And before he could stop himself some part of his brain that
had nothing to do took control of his mouth and added, Heroes, in fact.
 Really?
 When one foot is stuck in the Grey Miasma of krull it is much easier to step right in and sink rather than
prolong the struggle. Rincewind let himself go.
 Yes, that one over there is Frig Stronginthearm, over there is Black Zenell-
 Is Hrun the Barbarian here? said Twoflower, looking around eagerly. Rincewind took a deep breath.
 That's him behind us, he said.
 The enormity of this lie was so great that its ripples did in fact spread out one of the lower astral planes
as far as the Magical Quarter across the river, where it picked up tremendous velocity from the huge
standing wave of power that always hovered there and bounced wildly across the Circle Sea. A
harmonic got as far as Hrun himself, currently fighting a couple of gnolls on a crumbling ledge high in the
Caderack Mountains, and caused him a moment's unexplained discomfort. Twoflower, meanwhile, had
thrown back the lid of the Luggage and was hastily pulling out a heavy black cube.
 This is fantastic, he said. They're never going to believe this at home.
 What's he going on about? said the sergeant doubtfully.
 He's pleased you rescued us, said Rincewind. He looked sidelong at the black box, half-expecting it to
explode or emit strange musical tones.
 Ah, said the sergeant. He was staring at the box, too.
 Twoflower smiled brightly at them.
 I'd like a record of the event, he said. Do you think you could ask them all to stand over by the
window, please? This won't take a moment. And, er, Rincewind? 
 Yes?
 Twoflower stood on tiptoe to whisper.
 I expect you know what this is, don't you? Rincewind stared down at the box. It had a round glass eye
protruding from the centre of one face, and a lever at the back.
 Not wholly,  he said.
 It's a device for making pictures quickly, said Twoflower. Quite a new invention. I'm rather proud of
it but, look, I don't think these gentlemen would - well, I mean they might be - sort of apprehensive?
Could you explain it to them? I'll reimburse them for their time, of course.
 He's got a box with a demon in it that draws pictures, said Rincewind shortly. 'do what the madman
says and he will give you gold.
 The Watch smiled nervously.
 I'd like you in the picture, Rincewind. That's fine. Twoflower took out the golden disc that Rincewind
had noticed before, squinted at its unseen face for a moment, muttered Thirty seconds should about do
it, and said brightly, Smile please!
 Smile, rasped Rincewind. There was a whirr from the box.
 Right.

 High above the disc the second albatross soared; so high in fact that its tiny mad orange eyes could see
the whole of the world and the great, glittering, girdling Circle Sea. There was a yellow message capsule
strapped to one leg. Far below it, unseen in the clouds, the bird that had brought the earlier message to
the Patrician of Ankh-Morpork flapped gently back to its home.

 Rincewind looked at the tiny square of glass in astonishment. There he was, all right - a tiny figure, in
perfect colour, standing in front of a group of Watchmen whose faces were each frozen in a terrified
rictus. A buzz of wordless terror went up from the men around him as they craned over his shoulder to
look.
 Grinning, Twoflower produced a handful of the Smaller coins Rincewind now recognized as
quarter-rhinu. He winked at the wizard.
 I had similar problems when I stopped over in the Brown Islands, he said. They thought the
iconograph steals a bit of their souls. Laughable, isn't it?
 Yarg, said Rincewind and then, because somehow that was hardly enough to keep up his side of the
conversation, added, I don't think it looks very like me, though.
 It's easy to operate, said Twoflower, ignoring him. Look, all you have to do is press this button. The
iconograph does the rest. Now, I'll just stand over here next to Hrun, and you can take the picture.
 The coins quietened the men's agitation in the way that gold can, and Rincewind was amazed to find, half
a minute later, that he was holding a little glass portrait of Twoflower wielding a huge notched sword and
smiling as though all his dreams had come true.

 
 They lunched at a small eating-house near the Brass Bridge, with the luggage nestling under the table.
The food and wine, both far superior to Rincewind's normal fare, did much to relax him. Things weren't
going to be too bad, he decided. A bit of invention and some quick thinking, that was all that was
needed.
 Twoflower seemed to be thinking too. Looking reflectively into his wine cup he said, Tavern fights are
pretty common around here, I expect?
 Oh, fairly.
 No doubt fixtures and fittings get damaged?
 Fixt - oh, I see. You mean like benches and whatnot. Yes, I suppose so.
 That must be upsetting for the innkeepers.
 I've never really thought about it. I suppose it must be one of the risks of the job.
 Twoflower regarded him thoughtfully.
 I might be able to help there. he said. Risks are my business. I say, this food is a bit greasy, isn't it?
 You did say you wanted to try some typical Morporkean food, said Rincewind. What was that about
risks?
 Oh, I know all about risks. They're my business.
 I thought that's what you said. I didn't believe it the first time either.
 Oh, I don't take risks. About the most exciting thing that happened to me was knocking some ink over.
I assess risks. Day after day. Do you know what the odds are against a house catching fire in the Red
Triangle district of des Pelargic? Five hundred and thirty-eight to one. I calculated that, he added with a
trace of pride.
 What– Rincewind tried to suppress a burp– what for? 'Scuse me. He helped himself to some more
wine
 For– Twoflower paused. I can't say it in Trob, I don't think the beTrobi have a word for it. In our
language we call it- he said a collection of outlandish syllables.
 Inn-sewer-ants, repeated Rincewind. That's a funny word. Wossit mean?
 Well suppose you have a ship loaded with, say, gold bars. it might run into storms or be taken by
pirates. You don't want that to happen, so you take out an ensewer-ants-polly-sea. I work out the odds
of the cargo being lost, based on weather and piracy records for the last twenty years, then I add on a
bit, then you pay me some money based on those odds-
 -and the bit- Rincewind said, waggling a finger solemnly.
 Then, if the cargo is lost, I reimburse you.
 Reeburs?
 Pay you the value of your cargo, said Twoflower patiently.
 Oh I get it. It's like a bet, right?
 A wager? In a way, I suppose.
 And you make money at this inn-sewer-ants?
 It offers a return on investment, certainly.
 Wrapped in the warm yellow glow of the wine, Rincewind tried to think of inn-sewer-ants in circle sea
terms.
 I don't think I unnerstan' this inn-sewer-ants, he said firmly, idly watching the world spin by,
 Magic now. Magic I unnerstan'.
 Twoflower grinned. Magic is one thing, and reflected-sound-of-underground-spirits is another, he said.
 Whah?
 What?
 That funny word you used, said Rincewind impatiently.
 Reflected-sound-of-underground-spirits?
 Never heard of it.
 Twoflower tried to explain.
 Rincewind tried to understand.

 In the long afternoon they toured the city Turnwise of the river. Twoflower led the way, with the strange
picture-box slung on a strap round his neck, Rincewind trailed behind, whimpering at intervals and
checking to see that his head was still there. A few others followed, too. In a city where public
executions, duels, fights, magical feuds and strange events regularly punctuated the daily round the
inhabitants had brought the profession of interested bystander to a peak of perfection. They were, to a
man, highly skilled yawpers. In any case, Twoflower was delightedly taking picture after picture of
people engaged in what he described as typical activities, and since a quarter-rhinu would subsequently
change hands for their trouble a tail of bemused and happy nouveux-riches was soon following him in
case this madman exploded in a shower of gold.
 At the Temple of the Seven-Handed Sek a hasty convocation of priests and ritual heart-transplant
artisans agreed that the hundred-span high statue of Sek was altogether too holy to be made into a magic
picture, but a payment of two rhinu left them astoundedly agreeing that perhaps He wasn't as holy as all
that.
 A prolonged session at the Whore Pits produced a number of colourful and instructive pictures, a
number of which Rincewind concealed about his person for detailed perusal in private. As the fumes
cleared from his brain he began to speculate seriously as to how the iconograph worked. Even a failed
wizard knew that some substances were sensitive to light. Perhaps the glass plates were treated by some
arcane process that froze the light, that passed through them or something like that, anyway. Rincewind
often suspected that there was something, somewhere, that was better than magic. He was usually
disappointed.
 However, he soon took every opportunity to operate the box. Twoflower was only too pleased to allow
this, since that enabled the little man to appear in his own pictures. It was at this point that Rincewind
noticed something strange. Possession of the box conferred a kind of power on the wielder which was
that anyone, confronted with the hypnotic glass eye, would submissively obey the most peremptory
orders about stance and expression.
 It was while he was thus engaged in the Plaza of Broken Moons that disaster struck. Twoflower had
posed alongside a bewildered charm-seller, his crowd of new-found admirers watching him with interest
in case he did something humorously lunatic.
 Rincewind got down on one knee, the better to arrange the picture, and pressed the enchanted lever.
 The box said, It's no good. I've run out of pink.
 A hitherto unnoticed door opened in front of his eyes. A small, green and hideously warty humanoid
figure leaned out, pointed at a colour-encrusted palette in one clawed hand, and screamed at him. No
pink, See? screeched the homunculus. No good you going on pressing the lever when there's no pink,
is there? If you wanted pink you shouldn't of took all those pictures of young ladies, should you? It's
monochrome from now on, friend. Alright?
 Alright. Yeah, Sure, said Rincewind. In one dim corner of the little box he thought he could see an
easle, and a tiny unmade bed. He hoped he couldn't.
 So long as that's understood, said the imp, and shut the door. Rincewind thought he could hear the
muffled sound of grumbling and the scrape of a stool being dragged across the floor.
 Twoflower- he began, and looked up.
 Twoflower had vanished. As Rincewind stared at the crowd, with sensations of prickly horror traveling
up his spine, there came a gentle prod in the small of his back.
 Turn without haste, said a voice like black silk. Or kiss your kidneys goodbye.
 The crowd watched with interest. It was turning out to be quite a good day.
 Rincewind turned slowly, feeling the point of the sword scrape along his ribs. At the other end of the
blade he recognized Stren Withel - thief, cruel swordsman, disgruntled contender for the title of worst
man in the world.
 Hi, he said weakly. A few yards away he noticed a couple of unsympathetic men raising the lid of the
Luggage and pointing excitedly at the bags of gold. Withel smiled. It made an unnerving effect on his
scar-crossed face.
 I know you, he said. a gutter wizard. What is that thing?
 Rincewind became aware that the lid of the Luggage was trembling slightly, although there was no wind.
And he was still holding the picture-box.
 This? It makes pictures, he said brightly. Hey. just hold that smile, will you? He backed away quickly
and pointed the box.
 For a moment Withel hesitated. What? he said.
 That's fine, hold it just like that said Rincewind.
 The thief paused, then growled and swung his sword back.
 There was a snap, and a duet of horrible screams Rincewind did not glance around for fear of the
terrible things he might see, and by the time Withel looked for him again he was on the other side of the
plaza and still accelerating.

 The albatross descended in wide, slow sweeps that ended in an undignified flurry of feathers and a
thump as it landed heavily on its platform in the Patrician's bird garden.
 The custodian of the birds, dozing in the sun and hardly expecting a long-distance message so soon after
this morning's arrival, jerked to his feet and looked up. A few moments later he was scuttling through the
palace's corridors holding the message capsule and - owing to carelessness brought on by surprise -
sucking at the nasty beak wound on the back of his hand

 Rincewind pounded down an alley, paying no heed to the screams of rage coming from the picture box
and cleared a high wall with his frayed robe flapping around him like the feathers of a dishevelled
jackdaw. He landed in the forecourt of a carpet shop, scattering the merchandise and customers dived
through its rear exit trailing apologies, skidded down another alley and stopped, teetering dangerously,
just as he was about to plunge unthinkingly into the Ankh.
 There are said to be some mystic rivers – one drop of which can steal a man's life away. After its turbid
passage through the twin cities the Ankh could have been one of them.
 In the distance the cries of rage took on a shrill note of terror. Rincewind looked around desperately for
a boat, or a handhold up the sheer walls on either side of him.
 He was trapped.
 Unbidden, the Spell welled up in his mind. It was perhaps untrue to say that he had learned it; it had
learned him. The episode had led to his expulsion from Unseen University, because, for a bet, he had
dared to open the pages of the last remaining copy of the creators own grimoire, The Octavo, while the
University librarian was otherwise engaged.. The spell had leapt out of the page and instantly burrowed
deeply into his mind, from whence even the combined talents of the Faculty of Medicine had been unable
to coax it. Precisely which one it was they were also unable to ascertain, except that it was one of the
eight basic spells that were intricately interwoven with the very fabric of time and space itself.
 Since then it had been showing a worrying tendency, when Rincewind was feeling rundown or especially
threatened, to try to get itself said. He clenched his teeth together but the first syllable forced itself around
the corner of his mouth. His left hand raised involuntarily and, as the magical force whirled him round,
began to give off octarine sparks
 The Luggage hurtled around the corner, its several hundred knees moving like pistons. Rincewind gaped.
The spell died, unsaid. The box didn't appear to be hampered in any way by the ornamental rug draped
roguishly over it, nor by the thief hanging by one arm from the lid. It was in a very real sense, a dead
weight. Further along the lid were the remains of two fingers, owner unknown.
 The Luggage halted a few feet from the wizard and, after a moment, retracted its legs. It had no eyes
that Rincewind could see, but he was never the less sure that it was staring at him. Expectantly.
 Shoo, he said weakly. It didn't budge, but the lid creaked open, releasing the dead thief.
 Rincewind remembered about the gold.
 Presumably the box had to have a master. In the absence of Twoflower, had it adopted him?
 The tide was turning and he could see debris drifting downstream in the yellow afternoon light towards
the river gate, a mere hundred yards downstream. It was the work of a moment to let the dead thief join
them. Even if it was found later it would hardly cause comment. And the sharks in the Ankh were used to
solid, regular meals.
 Rincewind watched the body drift away, and considered his next move. The Luggage would probably
float. All he had to do was wait until dusk, and then go out with the tide. There were plenty of wild places
downstream where he could wade ashore, and then - well, if the Patrician really had sent out word about
him then a change of clothing and a shave should take care of that. In any case, there were other lands
and he had a facility for languages. Let him but get to Chimera or Gonim or Ecalpon and half a dozen
armies couldn't bring him back. And then - wealth, comfort, security
 There was, of course, the problem of Twoflower.
 Rincewind allowed himself a moment's sadness.
 It could be worse, he said by way of farewell. It could be me.
 It was when he tried to move that he found his robe was caught on some obstruction. By craning his
neck he found that the edge of it was being gripped firmly by the Luggage's lid.
 

 Ah, Gorphal, said the Patrician pleasantly. Come in. Sit down. Can I press you to a candied starfish?
 I am yours to command, master, said the old man calmly. Save, perhaps, in the matter of preserved
echinoderms.
 The Patrician shrugged, and indicated the scroll on the table.
 Read that, he said.
 Gorphal picked up the parchment and raised one eyebrow slightly when he saw the familiar ideograms
of the Golden Empire. He read in silence for perhaps a minute, and then turned the scroll over to examine
minutely the seal on the obverse.
 You are famed as a student of empire affairs, said the Patrician. Can you explain this?
 Knowledge in the matter of the Empire lies less in noting particular events than in studying a certain cast
of mind, said the old diplomat. The message is curious, yes, but not surprising.
 This morning the Emperor instructed, the Patrician allowed himself the luxury of a scowl, instructed
me, Gorphal, to protect this Twoflower person. Now it seems I must have him killed. You don't find that
surprising?
 No. The Emperor is no more than a boy. He is idealistic. Keen. A god to his people. Whereas this
afternoon's letter is, unless I am very much mistaken, from Nine Turning mirrors, the Grand Vizier. He
has grown old in the service of several Emperors. He regards them as a necessary but tiresome ingredient
in the successful running of the Empire. He does not like things out of place. The Empire was not built by
allowing things to get out of place. That is his view.
 I begin to see– said the Patrician.
 Quite so. Gorphal smiled into his beard. This tourist is a thing that is out of place. After acceding to his
master's wishes Nine Turning Mirrors would, I am quite sure, make his own arrangements with a view to
ensuring that one wanderer would not be allowed to return home bringing, perhaps, the disease of
dissatisfaction. The Empire likes people to stay where it puts them. So much more convenient, then, if this
Two Flower disappears for good in the barbarian lands. Meaning here, master.
 And your advice? said the Patrician.
 Gorphal shrugged.
 Merely that you should do nothing. Matters will undoubtedly resolve themselves. However, he
scratched an ear thoughtfully, perhaps the Assassins' Guild?
 Ah yes, said the Patrician. The Assassins guild. Who is their president at the moment?
 Zlorf Flannelfoot, master.
 Have a word with him, will you?
 Quite so, master.
 The Patrician nodded. It was all rather a relief. He agreed with Nine Turning Mirrors - life was difficult
enough; People ought to stay where they were put.

 Brilliant constellations shone down on the Discworld. One by one the traders shuttered their shops. One
by one the gonophs, thieves, finewirers, whores, illusionists, backsliders and second-storey men awoke
and breakfasted. Wizards went about their polydimensional affairs. Tonight saw the conjunction of two
powerful planets, and already the air over the Magical Quarter was hazy with early spells.

 Look, said Rincewind, this isn't getting us anywhere. He inched sideways. The Luggage followed
faithfully, lid half open and menacing. Rincewind briefly considered making a desperate leap to safety.
The lid smacked in anticipation. In any case, he told himself with sinking heart, the damn thing would only
follow him again. It had that dogged look about it. Even if he managed to get to a horse, he had a nasty
suspicion that it would follow him at its own pace. Endlessly. Swimming rivers and oceans. Gaining
slowly every night, while he had to stop to sleep. And then one day, in some exotic city and years hence,
he'd hear the sound of hundreds of tiny feet accelerating down the road behind him
 You've got the wrong man! he moaned. it's not my fault! I didn't kidnap him!
 The box moved forward slightly. Now there was just a narrow strip of greasy jetty between Rincewind's
heels and the river. A flash of precognition told him that the box would be able to swim faster than he
could. He tried not to imagine what it would be like to drown in the Ankh.
 It won't stop until you give in, you know, said a small voice conversationally.
 Rincewind looked down at the iconograph, still hanging around his neck. Its trapdoor was open and the
homunculus was leaning against the trap, smoking a pipe and watching the proceedings with amusement.
 I'll take you in with me, at least, said Rincewind through gritted teeth.
 The imp took the pipe out of his mouth. What did you say? he said.
 I said I'll take you in with me, dammit!
 Suit yourself. The imp tapped the side of the box meaningfully. We'll see who sinks first.
 The luggage yawned, and moved forward a fraction of an inch.
 Oh all right, said Rincewind irritably. But you'll have to give me time to think.
 The luggage backed off slowly. Rincewind edged his way back onto reasonably safe land and sat down
with his back against a wall. Across the river the lights of Ankh city glowed.
 You're a wizard, said the picture imp. You'll think of some way to find him.
 Not much of a wizard, I'm afraid.
 You can just jump down on everyone and turn them into worms, the imp added encouragingly,
ignoring his last remark.
 No. Turning To Animals is an Eighth Level spell. I never even completed my training. I only know one
spell.
 Well, that'll do.
 I doubt it, said Rincewind hopelessly
 What does it do, then?
 Can't tell you. Don't really want to talk about it. But frankly, he sighed , no spells are much good. It
takes three months to commit even a simple one to memory, and then once you've used it,pow it's gone.
that's what's so stupid about the whole magic thing, You know. You spend twenty years learning the spell
that makes nude virgins appear in your bedroom, and then you're so poisoned by quicksilver fumes and
half-blind from reading old grimoires that you can't remember what happens next.
 I never thought of it like that, said the imp.
 Hey, look - this is all wrong. When Twoflower said they'd got better kind of magic in the empire I
thought- I thought
 The imp looked at him expectantly. Rincewind cursed to himself.
 Well, if you must know, I thought he didn't mean magic. Not as such.
 What else is there, then?
 Rincewind began to feel really wretched. I don't know, he said. A better way of doing things, I
suppose. Something with a bit of sense in it. Harnessing - harnessing the lightning, or something.
 The imp gave him a kind but pitying look.
 Lightning is the spears hurled by the thunder giants when they fight, it said gently, established
meteorological fact. You can't harness it.
 I know, said Rincewind miserably. That's the flaw in the argument, of course.
 The imp nodded. and disappeared into the depths of the iconograph. A few moments later Rincewind
smelled bacon frying. He waited until his stomach couldn't stand the strain any more, and rapped on the
box. The imp reappeared.
 I've been thinking about what you said, it said even before Rincewind could open his mouth. And
even if you could get a harness on it, how could you get it to pull a cart?
 What the hell are you talking about?
 Lightning. It just goes up and down. You'd want it to go along, not up and down. Anyway, it'd
probably burn through the harness.
 I don't care about the lightning! How can I think on an empty stomach?
 Eat something, then. That's logic.
 How? Every time I move that damn box flexes its hinges at me!
 The luggage, on cue, gaped widely.
 See?
 It's not trying to bite you, said the imp. There's food in there. You're no use to it starved.
 Rincewind peered into the dark recesses of the Luggage. There were indeed, among the chaos of boxes
and bags of gold, several bottles and packages in oiled paper. He gave a cynical laugh, mooched around
the abandoned jetty until he found a piece of wood about the right length, wedged it as politely as
possible in the gap between the lid and the box, and pulled out one of the flat packages. It held biscuits
that turned out to be as hard as diamond-wood.
 Bloody hell, he muttered, nursing his teeth.
 Captain Eightpanther's Travellers' Digestives, them, said the imp from the doorway to his box, saved
many a life at sea, they have.
 Oh, sure. Do you use them as a raft, or just throw them to the sharks and sort of watch them sink?
What's in the bottles? Poison?
 Water.
 But there's water everywhere! Why'd he want to bring water?
 Trust.
 Trust?
 Yes. That's what he didn't, the water here. See?
 Rincewind opened a bottle. The liquid inside might have been water. It had a flat, empty flavour, with no
trace of life. Neither taste nor smell. he grumbled The luggage gave a little creak, attracting his attention.
With a lazy air of calculated menace it shut its lid slowly, grinding Rincewind's impromptu wedge like a
dry loaf.
 All right, all right, he said. I'm thinking.

 
 Ymor's headquarters were in the leaning Tower at the junction of Rime Street and Frost Alley. At
midnight the solitary guard leaning in the shadows looked up at the conjoining planets and wondered idly
what change in his fortunes they might herald.
 There was the faintest of sounds, as of a gnat yawning.
 The guard glanced down the deserted street, and now caught the glimmer of moonlight on something
lying in the mud a few yards away. He picked it up. The lunar light gleamed on gold, and his intake of
breath was almost loud enough to echo down the alleyway.
 There was a slight sound again, and another coin rolled into the gutter on the other side of the street.
 By the time he had picked it up there was another one, a little way off and still spinning. Gold was, he
remembered, said to be formed from the crystallized light of stars. Until now he had never believed it to
be true, that something as heavy as gold could fall naturally from the sky.
 As he drew level with the opposite alley mouth some more fell. It was still in its bag, there was an awful
lot of it, and Rincewind brought it down heavily onto his head.
 When the guard came to he found himself looking up into the wild-eyed face of a wizard, who was
menacing his throat with a sword. In the darkness too, something was gripping his leg.
 It was the disconcerting sort of grip that suggested that the gripper could grip a whole lot harder, if he
wanted to.
 Where is he, the rich foreigner? hissed the wizard. Quickly!
 What's holding my leg? said the man, with a note of terror in his voice. He tried to wriggle free.
 The pressure increased
 You wouldn't want to know, said Rincewind
 Pay attention, please. Where's the foreigner?
 Not here. They've got him at Broadman's place.
 Everyone's looking for him! You're Rincewind aren't you? The box - the box that bites people
ononono pleasssse
 Rincewind had gone. The guard felt the unseen leg-gripper release his - or, as he was beginning to fear,
it's - hold. Then, as he tried to pull himself to his feet, something big and heavy and square cannoned into
him out of the dark and plunged off after the wizard. Something with hundreds of tiny feet.

 With only his home-made phrase book to help him Twoflower was trying to explain the mysteries of
in-sour-ants to Broadman. The fat innkeeper was listening intently, his little black eyes glittering. From the
other end of the table Ymor watched with mild amusement, occasionally feeding one of his ravens with
scraps from his plate. Beside him Withel paced up and down.
 You fret too much, said Ymor, without taking his eyes from the two men opposite him. I can feel it,
Stren. Who would dare attack us here? And the gutter wizard will come. He's too much of a coward not
to. And he'll try to bargain. And we shall have him. And the gold. And the chest.
 Withel's one eye glared, and he made a fist into the palm of a black-gloved hand.
 Who would have thought there was so much sapient pearwood in the whole of the disc? he said.
 How could we have known?
 You fret too much, Stren. I'm sure you can do better this time, said Ymor pleasantly.
 The lieutenant snorted in disgust, and strode off around the room to bully his men. Ymor carried on
watching the tourist.
 It was strange, but the little man didn't seem to realise the seriousness of his position. Ymor had on
several occasions seen him look around the room with an expression of deep satisfaction he had also
been talking for ages to Broadman and Ymer had seen a piece of paper change hands and Broadman
had given the foreigner some coins. It was strange. When Broadman got up and waddled past Ymer's
chair the thiefmasters arm shot out like a steel spring and grabbed the fat man by his apron.
 What was that all about, friend? asked Ymor quietly.
 N-nothing, Ymor. Just private business, like.
 There are no secrets between friends, Broadman.
 Yar. Well, I'm not sure about it myself, really. It's a sort of bet, see? said the innkeeper nervously
inn-sewer-ants, it's called. It's like a bet that the Broken Drum won't get burned down.
 Ymor held the man's gaze until Broadman twitched in fear and embarrassment. Then the thiefmaster
laughed.
 This worm-eaten old tinder pile? he said. The man must be mad! 
 Yes, but mad with money. He says now he's got the - can't remember the word, begins with a P, it's
what you might call the stake money- the people he works for in the Agatean Empire will pay up. If the
Broken Drum burns down. Not that I hope it does. Burn down. The Broken Drum, I mean. I mean, it's
like a home to me, is the Drum
 Not entirely stupid, are you? said Ymor, and pushed the innkeeper away.
 The door slammed back on its hinges and thudded into the wall.
 Hey, that's my door.  screamed Broadman. Then he realised who was standing at the top of the steps,
and ducked behind the table a mere shaving of time before a short black dart sped across the room and
thunked into the woodwork.
 Ymor moved his hand carefully, and poured out another flagon of beer.
 Won't you join me, Zlorf? he said levelly. and put that sword away, Stren. Zlorf Flannelfoot is our
friend 
 The president of the Assassins' Guild spun his short blowgun dexterously and slotted it into its holster in
one smooth movement.
 Stren! said Ymor.
 The black-clad thief hissed, and sheathed his sword. But he kept his hand on the hilt, and his eyes on the
assassin.
 That wasn't easy. Promotion in the Assassins Guild was by competitive examination, the Practical being
the most important - indeed, the only - part. Thus Zlorf's broad, honest face was a welter of scar tissue,
the result of many a close encounter. It probably hadn't been all that good-looking in any case- it was
said that Zlorf had chosen a profession in which dark hoods, cloaks and nocturnal prowlings figured
largely because there was a day-fearing trollish streak in his parentage. People who said this in earshot of
Zlorf tended to carry their ears home in their hats.
 He strolled down the stairs, followed by a number of assassins. When he was directly in front of Ymor
he said I've come for the tourist.
 Is it any of Your business, Zlorf?
 Yes. Gringo, Urmond - take him.
 Two of the assassins stepped forward. Then Stren was in front of them, his sword appearing to
materialise an inch from their throats without having to pass through the intervening air.
 Possibly I could only kill one of you, he murmured, but I suggest you ask yourselves which one?
 Look up, Zlorf, said Ymor.
 A row of yellow, baleful eyes looked down from the darkness among the rafters.
 One step more and you'll leave here with fewer eyeballs than you came with, said the thiefmaster. So
sit down and have a drink, Zlorf, and let's talk about this sensibly. I thought we had an agreement. You
don't rob- I don't kill. Not for payment, that is, he added after a pause.
 Zlorf took the proffered beer.
 So? he said. I'll kill him. Then you rob him. Is he that funny looking one over there?
 Yes.
 Zlorf stared at Twoflower, who grinned at him.
 He shrugged. He seldom wasted time wondering why people wanted other people dead. It was just a
living. Who is your client, may I ask? said Ymor.
 Zlorf held up a hand. Please! he protested. Professional etiquette.
 Of course. By the way-
 Yes?
 I believe I have a couple of guards outside-
 Had.
 And some others in the doorway across the street-
 Formerly.
 And two bowmen on the roof.
 A flicker of doubt passed across Zlorf's face, like the last shaft of sunlight over a badly ploughed field.
The door flew open, badly damaging the assassin who was standing beside it.
 Stop doing that! shrieked Broadman, from under his table.
 Zlorf and Ymor stared up at the figure on the threshold. It was short, fat and richly dressed. Very richly
dressed. There were a number of tall, big shapes looming behind it. Very big, threatening shapes.
 Who's that? said Zlorf.
 I know him, said Ymor. His name's Rerpf. He runs the Groaning Platter tavern down by Brass
Bridge. Stren - remove him.
 Rerpf held up a beringed hand. Stren Withel hesitated halfway to the door as several very large trolls
ducked under the doorway and stood on either side of the fat man, blinking in the light. Muscles the size
of melons bulged in forearms like flour sacks. Each troll held a double-headed axe. Between thumb and
forefinger.
 Broadman erupted from cover, his face Suffused with rage.
 Out! he screamed. Get those trolls out of here! No-one moved. The room was suddenly quiet.
 Broadman looked around quickly. It began to dawn on him just what he had said, and to whom. A
whimper escaped from his lips, glad to be free. He reached the doorway to his cellars just as one of the
trolls, with a lazy flick of one ham-sized hand, sent his axe whirling across the room. The slam of the door
and its subsequent splitting as the axe hit it merged into one sound.
 Bloody hell! exclaimed Zlorf Flannelfoot.
 What do you want? said Ymor.
 I am here on behalf of the Guild of Merchants and Traders, said Rerpf evenly. to protect our interests,
you might say. Meaning the little man.
 Ymor wrinkled his brows.
 I'm sorry, he said. I thought I heard you say the Guild of Merchants?
 And traders, agreed Rerpf. Behind him now, in addition to more trolls, were several humans that Ymor
vaguely recognized. He had seen them, maybe, behind counters and bars. Shadowy figures, usually -
easily ignored, easily forgotten. At the back of his mind a bad feeling began to grow. He thought about
how it might be to be, say, a fox confronted with an angry sheep. A sheep, moreover, that could afford
to employ wolves.
 How long has this - Guild - been in existence, may I ask? he said.
 Since this afternoon, said Rerpf. I'm viceguildmaster in charge of tourism, you know.
 What is this tourism of which you Speak?
 Uh - we are not quite sure said Rerpf. An old bearded man poked his head over the guildmaster's
shoulder and cackled, speaking on behalf of the winesellers of Morpork, Tourism means Business See?
 Well? said Ymor coldly.
 Well, said Rerpf, we're protecting our interests, like I said.
 Thieves OUT, Thieves OUT! cackled his elderly companion. Several others took up the chant. Zlorf
grinned. and assassins, chanted the old man. Zlorf growled.
 Stands to reason, said Rerpf. People robbing and murdering all over the place, what sort of
impression are visitors going to take away? You come all the way to see our fine city with its many points
of historical and civic interest, also many quaint customs, and you wake up dead in some back alley or as
it might be floating down the Ankh, how are you going to tell all your friends what a great time you're
having? Let's face it, you've got to move with the times.
 Zlorf and Ymor met each other's gaze.
 We have, have we? said Ymor.
 Then let us move, brother, agreed Zlorf. In one movement he brought his blowgun to his mouth and
sent a dart hissing towards the nearest troll. It spun around, hurling its axe, which whirred over the
assassin's head and buried itself in a luckless thief behind him.
 Rerpf ducked, allowing a troll behind him to raise its huge iron crossbow and fire a spear-length quarrel
into the nearest assassin. That was the start

 It has been remarked before that those who are sensitive to radiations in the far octarine - the eighth
colour, the pigment of the imagination- can see things that others cannot.
 Thus it was that Rincewind, hurrying through the crowded, flare-lit evening bazaars of Morpork. With
the luggage trundling behind him, jostled a tall dark figure, turned to deliver a few suitable curses, and
beheld Death.
 It had to be Death. No-one else went around with empty eye sockets and, of course, the scythe over
one shoulder was another clue. As Rincewind stared in horror a courting couple, laughing at some private
joke, walked straight through the apparition without appearing to notice it.
 Death, insofar as it was possible in a face with no movable features, looked surprised.
 RINCEWIND? Death said, in tones as deep and heavy as the slamming of leaden doors, far
underground.
 Um, said Rincewind, trying to back away from that eyeless stare.
 BUT WHY ARE YOU HERE? (Boom, boom went crypt lids, in the worm-haunted fastnesses under
old mountains)
 Um, why not? said Rincewind. Anyway, I'm sure you've got lots to do, so if you'll just-
 I WAS SURPRISED THAT YOU JOSTLED ME, RINCEWIND. FOR I HAVE AN
APPOINTMENT WITH THEE THIS VERY NIGHT.
 Oh no, not-
 OF COURSE, WHAT'S SO BLOODY VEXING ABOUT THE WHOLE BUSINESS IS THAT I
WAS EXPECTING TO MEET THEE IN PSEUDOPOLIS.
 But that's five hundred miles away!
 YOU DON'T HAVE TO TELL ME, THE WHOLE SYSTEM'S GOT SCREWED UP AGAIN. I
CAN SEE THAT. LOOK THERE'S NO CHANCE OF YOU–?
 Rincewind backed away, hands spread protectively in front of him. The dried fish salesman on a nearby
stall watched this madman with interest.
 I COULD LEND YOU A VERY FAST HORSE. IT WON'T HURT A BIT.
 No! Rincewind turned and ran. Death watched him go and shrugged bitterly.
 SOD YOU, THEN, Death said. He turned, and noticed the fish salesman. With a snarl Death reached
out a bony finger and stopped the man's heart, but he didn't take much pride in it.
 Then Death remembered what was due to happen later that night. It would not be true to say that Death
smiled, because in any case His features were perforce frozen in a calcareous grin. But He hummed a
little tune, cheery as a plague pit, and pausing only to extract the life from a passing mayfly, and one-ninth
of the lives from a cat cowering under the fish stall (all cats can see into the octarine) - Death turned on
His heel and set off towards the Broken Drum.

 
 Short Street, Morpork, is in fact one of the longest in the city. Filigree Street crosses its turnwise end in
the manner of the crosspiece of a T, and the Broken Drum is so placed that it looks down the full length
of the street.
 At the furthermost end of Short Street a dark oblong rose on hundreds of tiny legs, and started to run.
At first it moved at no more than a lumbering trot, but by the time it was halfway up the street it was
moving arrow-fast
 A darker shadow inched its way along one of the walls of the Drum, a few yards from the two trolls who
were guarding the door. Rincewind was sweating. If they heard the faint clinking of the
specially-prepared bags at his belt
 One of the trolls tapped his colleague on the shoulder, producing a noise like two pebbles being
knocked together. He pointed down the starlit street
 Rincewind darted from his hiding place, turned, and hurled his burden through the Drum's nearest
window.
 Withel saw it arrive. The bag arced across the room, turning slowly in the air, and burst on the edge of a
table. A moment later gold coins were rolling across the floor, spinning, glittering.
 The room was suddenly silent, save for the tiny noises of gold and the whimpers of the wounded. With a
curse Withel despatched the assassin he had been fighting. It's a trick! he screamed. No-one move!
 Three score men and a dozen trolls froze in mid-grope.
 Then, for the third time, the door burst open. Two trolls hurried through it, slammed it behind them
dropped the heavy bar across it and fled down the stairs.
 Outside there was a sudden crescendo of running feet. And, for the last time, the door opened. In fact it
exploded, the great wooden bar being hurled far across the room and the frame itself giving way. Door
and frame landed on a table, which flew into splinters. It was then that the frozen fighters noticed that
there was something else in the pile of wood. It was a box, shaking itself madly to free itself of the
smashed timber around it.
 Rincewind appeared in the ruined doorway hurling another of his gold grenades. It smashed into a wall,
showering coins.

 Down in the cellar Broadman looked up, muttered to himself, and carried on with his work. His entire
spindlewinter's supply of candles had already been strewn on the floor, mixed with his store of kindling
wood. Now he was attacking a barrel of lamp oil. inn-sewer-ants he muttered. Oil gushed out and
swirled around his feet.

 
 Withel stormed across the floor, his face a mask of rage. Rincewind took careful aim and caught the thief
full in the chest with a bag of gold. But now Ymor was shouting, and pointing an accusing finger. A raven
swooped down from its perch in the rafters and dived at the wizard, talons open and gleaming.
 It didn't make it. At about the halfway point the Luggage leapt from its bed of splinters, gaped briefly in
mid-air, and snapped shut.
 It landed lightly. Rincewind saw its lid open again, slightly. Just far enough for a tongue, large as a palm
leaf, red as mahogany, to lick up a few errant feathers.
 At the same moment the giant candlewheel fell from the ceiling, plunging the room into gloom.
Rincewind, coiling himself like a spring, gave a standing jump and grasped a beam, swinging himself up
into the relative safety of the roof with a strength that amazed him.
 Exciting, isn't it? said a voice by his ear.
 Down below, thieves, assassins, trolls and merchants all realised at about the same moment that they
were in a room made treacherous of foothold by gold coins and containing something, among the
suddenly menacing shapes in the semi-darkness, that was absolutely horrible. As one they made for the
door, but had two dozen different recollections of its exact position.
 High above the chaos Rincewind stared at Twoflower.
 Did you cut the lights down? he hissed.
 Yes.
 How come you're up here?
 I thought I'd better not get in everyone's way–
 Rincewind considered this. There didn't seem to be much he could say. Twoflower added A real
brawl! Better than anything I'd imagined! Do you think I ought to thank them? Or did you arrange it? 
Rincewind looked at him blankly. I think we ought to be getting down now, he said hollowly.
 Everyone's gone.
 He dragged Twoflower across the littered floor and up the steps. They burst out into the tail end of the
night. There were still a few stars but the moon was down, and there was a faint grey glow to rimward.
Most important, the street was empty. Rincewind sniffed.
 Can you smell oil? he said.
 Then Withel stepped out of the shadows and tripped him up.

 At the top of the cellar steps Broadman knelt down and fumbled in his tinderbox. It turned out to be
damp.
 I'll kill that bloody cat, he muttered, and groped for the spare box that was normally on the ledge by
the door. It was missing. Broadman said a bad word.
 A lighted taper appeared in mid-air, right beside him.
 HERE, TAKE THIS.
 Thanks, said Broadman.
 DON'T MENTION IT.
 Broadman went to throw the taper down the steps. His hand paused in mid-air. He looked at the taper,
his brow furrowing. Then he turned around and held the taper up to illuminate the scene. It didn't shed
much light, but it did give the darkness a shape
 Oh, no he breathed.
 BUT YES, said Death.

 Rincewind rolled.
 For a moment he thought Withel was going to spit him where he lay. But it was worse than that. He was
waiting for him to get up.
 I see you have a sword, wizard, he said quietly. I suggest you rise, and we shall see how well you use
it. Rincewind stood up as slowly as he dared, and drew from his belt the short sword he had taken from
the guard a few hours and a hundred years ago. It was a short blunt affair compared to Withel 's hair-thin
rapier.
 But I don't know how to use a sword, he wailed.
 Good.
 You know that wizards can't be killed by edged weapons? said Rincewind desperately. Withel smiled
coldly. So I have heard, he said. I look forward to putting it to the test. He lunged. Rincewind caught
the thrust by sheer luck, jerked his hand away in shock, deflected the second stroke by coincidence, and
took the third one through his robe at heart-height.
 There was a clink.
 Withel's snarl of triumph died in his throat. He drew the sword out and prodded again at the wizard,
who was rigid with terror and guilt. There was another clink, and gold coins began to drop out of the hem
of the wizard's robe.
 So you bleed gold, do you? hissed Withel. But have you got gold concealed in that raggedy beard,
you little-
 As his sword went back for his final sweep the sullen glow that had been growing in the doorway of the
Broken Drum flickered, dimmed, and erupted into a roaring fireball that sent the walls billowing outward
and carried the roof a hundred feet into the air before bursting through it, in a gout of red-hot tiles.
 Withel stared at the boiling flames, unnerved. And Rincewind leapt. He ducked under the thief's sword
arm and brought his own blade around in an arc so incompetently misjudged that it hit the man flat-first
and jolted out of the wizard's hand. Sparks and droplets of flaming oil rained down as Withel reached out
with both gauntleted hands and grabbed Rincewind's neck, forcing him down.
 You did this! he screamed. You and your box of trickery. 
 His thumb found Rincewind's windpipe. This is it, the wizard thought. Wherever I'm going, it can't be
worse than here
 Excuse me, said Twoflower.
 Rincewind felt the grip lessen. And now Withel was slowly getting up, a look of absolute hatred on his
face.
 A glowing ember landed on the wizard. He brushed it off hurriedly, and scrambled to his feet.
Twoflower was behind Withel, holding the man's own needle-sharp sword with the point resting in the
small of the thief's back. Rincewind's eyes narrowed. He reached into his robe, then withdrew his hand
bunched into a fist.
 Don't move, he said.
 Am I doing this right? asked Twoflower anxiously.
 He says he'll skewer your liver if you move,
 Rincewind translated freely.
 I doubt it, said Withel.
 Bet?
 No!
 As Withel tensed himself to turn on the tourist Rincewind lashed out and caught the thief on the jaw.
Withel stared at him in amazement for a moment, and then quietly toppled into the mud.
 The wizard uncurled his stinging fist and the roll of gold coins slipped between his throbbing fingers.
 He looked down at the recumbent thief.
 Good grief, he gasped.
 He looked up and yelled as another ember landed on his neck. Flames were racing along the rooftops
on the other side of the street. All around him people were hurling possessions from windows and
dragging horses from smoking stables. Another explosion in the white-hot volcano that was the Drum
sent a whole marble mantelpiece scything overhead.
 The Widdershin Gate's the nearest! Rincewind shouted above the crackle of collapsing rafters. Come
on!
 He grabbed Twoflower's reluctant arm and dragged him down the street.
 My luggage!
 Blast your luggage. Stay here much longer and you'll go where you don't need luggage. Come on!
screamed Rincewind.
 They jogged on through the crowd of frightened people leaving the area, while the wizard took great
mouthfuls of cool dawn air. Something was puzzling him.
 I'm sure all the candles went out, he said. So how did the Drum catch fire?
 I don't know, moaned Twoflower. it's terrible, Rincewind. We were getting along so well, too.
 Rincewind stopped in astonishment, so that another refugee cannoned into him and spun away with an
oath.
 Getting on?
 Yes, a great bunch of fellows, I thought language was a bit of a problem, but they were so keen for me
to join their party, they just wouldn't take no for an answer - really friendly people, I thought
 Rincewind started to correct him, then realised he didn't know how to begin.
 It'll be a blow for old Broadman, Twoflower continued. Still, he was wise. I've still got the rhinu he
paid as his first premium.
 Rincewind didn't know the meaning of the word premium, but his mind was working fast.
 You inn-sewered the Drum? he said. You bet Broadman it wouldn't catch fire?
 Oh yes. Standard valuation. Two hundred rhinu, Why do you ask?
 Rincewind turned and stared at the flames racing towards them, and wondered how much of Ankh
Morpork could be bought for two hundred rhinu. Quite a large piece, he decided. Only not now, not the
way those flames were moving He glanced down at the tourist.
 You- he began, and searched his memory for the worst word in the Trob tongue; the happy little
beTrobi didn't really know how to swear properly.
 You, he repeated. Another hurrying figure bumped into him, narrowly missing him with the blade over
its shoulder. Rincewind's tortured temper exploded.
 You little (such a one who, while wearing a copper nose ring, stands in a footbath atop Mount
Raruaruaha during a heavy thunderstorm and shouts that Alohura, Goddess of Lightning, has the facial
features of a diseased uloruaha root!)
 JUST DOING MY JOB, said the figure, stalking off.
 Every word fell as heavily as slabs of marble; moreover, Rincewind was certain that he was the only one
who heard them.
 He grabbed Twoflower again.
 Let's get out of here! he suggested.

 One interesting side effect of the fire in Ankh-Morpork concerns the inn-sewer-ants policy, which left
the city through the ravaged roof of the Broken Drum, was wafted high into the Discworld's atmosphere
on the ensuing thermal, and came to earth several days and a few thousand miles away on an uloruaha
bush in the beTrobi islands. The simple, laughing islanders subsequently worshipped it as a god, much to
the amusement of their more sophisticated neighbours. Strangely enough the rainfall and harvests in the
next few years were almost supernaturally abundant, and this led to a research team being despatched to
the islands by the Minor Religions faculty of Unseen University. Their verdict was that it only went to
show.

 The fire, driven by the wind, spread out from the Drum faster than a man could walk. The timbers of the
Widdershin Gate were already on fire when Rincewind, his face blistered and reddened from the flames,
reached them. By now he and Twoflower were on horseback - mounts hadn't been that hard to obtain.
A wily merchant had asked fifty times their worth, and had been left gaping when one thousand times
their worth had been pressed into his hands.
 They rode through just before the first of the big gate timbers descended in an explosion of sparks
Morpork was already a cauldron of flame.
 As they galloped up the red-lit road Rincewind glanced sideways at his travelling companion currently
trying hard to learn to ride a horse.
 Bloody hell, he thought. He's alive! Me too. Who'd have thought it? Perhaps there is something in this
reflected-sound-of-underground- spirits? It was a cumbersome phrase. Rincewind tried to get his tongue
round the thick syllables that were the word in Twoflower's own language.
 Ecolirix? he tried. Ecro-gnothics? Echo-gnomics?
 That would do. That sounded about right.

 
 Several hundred yards downriver from the last smouldering suburb of the city a strangely rectangular and
apparently heavily-waterlogged object touched the mud on the widdershin bank. Immediately it sprouted
numerous legs and scrabbled for a purchase.
 Hauling itself to the top of the bank the Luggage–streaked with soot, stained with water and very very
angry - shook itself and took its bearings. Then it moved away at a brisk trot, the small and incredibly
ugly imp that was perching on its lid watching the scenery with interest.

 Bravd looked at the Weasel and raised his eyebrows.
 And that's it, said Rincewind, The Luggage caught up with us, don't ask me how. Is there any more
wine?
 The Weasel picked up the empty wineskin.
 I think you have had just about enough wine this night, he said.
 Bravd's forehead wrinkled.
 Gold is gold, he said finally. How can a man with plenty of gold consider himself poor? You're either
poor or rich. It stands to reason–
 Rincewind hiccupped. He was finding Reason rather difficult to hold on to. Well, he said, what I think
is, the point is, well, you know octiron?
 The two adventurers nodded. The strange iridescent metal was almost as highly valued in the lands
around the Circle Sea as sapient pearwood, and was about as rare. A man who owned a needle made of
octiron would never lose his way, since it always pointed to the Hub of the Discworld, being acutely
sensitive to the disc's magical field; it would also miraculously darn his socks.
 Well, my point is, you see, that gold also has its sort of magical field. Sort of financial wizardry.
Echo-gnomics. Rincewind giggled.
 The Weasel stood up and stretched. The sun was well up now, and the city below them was wreathed in
mists and full of foul vapours. Also gold, he decided. Even a citizen of Morpork would, at the very point
of death, desert his treasure to save his skin. Time to move.
 The little man called Twoflower appeared to be asleep. The Weasel looked down at him and shook his
head.
 The city awaits, such as it is, he said. Thank you for a pleasant tale, Wizard. What will you do now?
 He eyed the Luggage, which immediately backed away and snapped its lid at him.
 Well, there are no ships leaving the city now, giggled Rincewind. I suppose we'll take the coast road
to Quirm. I've got to look after him, you see. But look, I didn't make it-
 Sure, sure, said the Weasel soothingly. He turned away and swung himself into the saddle of the horse
that Bravd was holding. A few moments later the two heroes were just specks under a cloud of dust,
heading down towards the charcoal city.
 Rincewind stared muzzily at the recumbent tourist. At two recumbent tourists. In his somewhat
defenceless state a stray thought, wandering through the dimensions in search of a mind to harbour it, slid
into his brain.
 Here's another fine mess you've got me into, he moaned, and slumped backwards.

 Mad, said the Weasel.
 Bravd, galloping along a few feet away, nodded.
 All wizards get like that, he said. it's the quicksilver fumes. Rots their brains. Mushrooms, too 
 However– said the brown-clad one. He reached into his tunic and took out a golden disc on a short
chain. Bravd raised his eyebrows.
 The wizard said that the little man had some sort of golden disc that told him the time, said the Weasel.
 Arousing your cupidity, little friend? You always were an expert thief, Weasel.
 Aye, agreed the Weasel modestly. He touched the knob at the disc's rim, and it flipped open.
 The very small demon imprisoned within looked up from its tiny abacus and scowled. It lacks but ten
minutes to eight of the clock, it snarled. The lid slammed shut, almost trapping the Weasel's fingers–
 With an oath the Weasel hurled the time-teller far out into the heather, where it possibly hit a stone.
Something, in any event, caused the case to split; there was a vivid octarine flash and a whiff of brimstone
as the time being vanished into whatever demonic dimension it called home.
 What did you do that for? said Bravd, who hadn't been close enough to hear the words.
 Do what? said the Weasel. I didn't do anything. Nothing happened at all. Come on - we're wasting
opportunities! 
 Bravd nodded. Together they turned their steeds and galloped towards ancient Ankh, and honest
enchantments.

 The Sending of Eight
 
 Prologue

 The Discworld offers sights far more impressive than those found in universes built by Creators with less
imagination but more mechanical aptitude. Although the disc's sun is but an orbiting moonlet, its
prominences hardly bigger than croquet hoops, this slight drawback must be set against the tremendous
sight of Great A'Tuin the Turtle, upon Whose ancient and meteor-riddled shell the disc ultimately rests.
Sometimes, in His slow journey across the shores of infinity, He moves His countrysized head to snap at
a passing comet.
 But perhaps the most impressive sight of all - if only because most brains, when faced with the sheer
galactic enormity of A'Tuin, refuse to believe it- is the endless Rimfall, where the seas of the disc boil
ceaselessly over the Edge into space. Or perhaps it is the Rimbow, the eight-coloured, worldgirdling
rainbow that hovers in the mist-laden air over the Fall. The eighth colour is octarine, caused by the
scatter-effect of strong sunlight on an intense magical field.
 Or perhaps, again, the most magnificent sight is the Hub. There, a spire of green ice ten miles high rises
through the clouds and supports at its peak the realm of Dunmanifestin, the abode of the disc gods. The
disc gods themselves, despite the splendour of the world below them, are seldom satisfied. It is
embarrassing to know that one is a god of a world that only exists because every improbability curve
must have its far end; especially when one can peer into other dimensions at worlds whose Creators had
more mechanical aptitude than imagination No wonder, then, that the disc gods spend more time in
bickering than in omnicognizance.
 On this particular day Blind Io, by dint of constant vigilance the chief of the gods, sat with his chin on his
hand and looked at the gaming board on the red marble table in front of him. Blind Io had got his name
because, where his eye sockets should have been, there were nothing but two areas of blank skin. His
eyes, of which he had an impressively large number, led a semi-independent life of their own. Several
were currently hovering above the table.
 The gaming board was a carefully-carved map of the disc world, overprinted with squares. A number of
beautifully modelled playing pieces were now occupying some of the squares. A human onlooker would,
for example, have recognized in two of them the likenesses of Bravd and the Weasel. Others represented
yet more heroes and champions, of which the disc had a more than adequate supply. Still in the game
were Io, Offler the Crocodile God,
 Zephyrus the god of slight breezes, Fate, and the lady. There was an air of concentration around the
board now that the lesser players had been removed from the Game. Chance had been an early casualty,
running her hero into a full house of armed gnolls (the result of a lucky throw by Offler) and shortly
afterwards Night had cashed his chips, pleading an appointment with Destiny. Several minor deities had
drifted up and were kibitzing over the shoulders of the players.
 Side bets were made that the Lady would be the next to leave the board. Her last champion of any
standing was now a pinch of potash in the ruins of still-smoking Ankh-Morpork. and there were hardly
any pieces that she could promote to first rank.
 Blind Io took up the dice-box, which was a skull–various orifices had been stoppered with rubies, and
with several of his eyes on the lady he rolled three fives. She smiled This was the nature of the Lady's
eyes they were bright green, lacking iris or pupil, and they glowed from within.
 The room was silent as she scrabbled in her box of pieces and, from the very bottom, produced a
couple that she set down on the board with two decisive clicks. The rest of the players, as one God,
craned forward to peer at them.
 A wenegad wiffard and tome fort of clerk, said Offler the Crocodile God, hindered as usual by his
tusks. Well, weally!  With one claw he pushed a pile of bone-white tokens into the centre of the table.
 The Lady nodded slightly. She picked up the dicecup and held it as steady as a rock, yet all the Gods
could hear the three cubes rattling about inside.
 And then She sent them bouncing across the table.
 A six. A three. A five.
 Something was happening to the five, however.
 Battered by the chance collision of several billion molecules, the die flipped onto a point, spun gently and
came down a seven.
 Blind Io picked up the cube and counted the sides. Come on, he said wearily, play fair.

 2. The Sending of Eight

 The road from Ankh-Morpork to Quirm is high, white and winding, a thirty-league stretch of potholes
and half-buried rocks that spirals around mountains and dips into cool green valleys of citrus trees,
crosses liana-webbed gorges on creaking rope bridges and is generally more picturesque than
Picturesque. That was a new word to Rincewind the wizard (Being Unseen University failed.) It was one
of a number he had picked up since leaving the charred ruins of Ankh-Morpork. Quaint was another
one. Picturesque meant - he decided after careful observation of the scenery that inspired Twoflower to
use the word - that the landscape was horribly precipitous. Quaint, when used to describe the occasional
village through which they passed, meant fever-ridden and tumbledown.
 Twoflower was a tourist, the first ever seen on the Discworld. Tourist, Rincewind had decided, meant
idiot.
 As they rode leisurely through the thyme-scented bee-humming air, Rincewind pondered on the
experiences of the last few days. While the little foreigner was obviously insane, he was also generous
and considerably less lethal than half the people the wizard had mixed with in the city–Rincewind rather
liked him. Disliking him would have been like kicking a puppy.
 Currently Twoflower was showing a great interest in the theory and practice of magic.
 It all seems, well, rather useless to me, he said. I always thought that, you know, a wizard just said the
magic words and that was that. Not all this tedious memorising.
 Rincewind agreed moodily. He tried to explain that magic had indeed once been wild and lawless, but
had been tamed back in the mists of time by the Olden Ones, who had bound it to obey among other
things the Law of Conservation of Reality; this demanded that the effort needed to achieve a goal should
be the same regardless of the means used. In practical terms this meant that, say, creating the illusion of a
glass of wine was relatively easy, since it involved merely the subtle shifting of light patterns. On the other
hand, lifting a genuine wineglass a few feet in the air by sheer mental energy required several hours of
systematic preparation if the wizard wished to prevent the simple principle of leverage flicking his brain
out through his ears.
 He went on to add that some of the ancient magic could still be found in its raw state, recognisable- to
the initiated - by the eightfold shape it made in the crystalline structure of space-time. There was the metal
octiron, for example, and the gas octogen. Both radiated dangerous amounts of raw enchantment.
 It's all very depressing, he finished.
 Depressing?
 Rincewind turned in his saddle and glanced at Twoflower's Luggage, which was currently ambling along
on its little legs, occasionally snapping its lid at butterflies. He sighed.
 Rincewind thinks he ought to be able to harness the lightning, said the picture-imp, who was observing
the passing scene from the tiny doorway of the box slung around Twoflower's neck. He had spent the
morning painting picturesque views and quaint scenes for his master, and had been allowed to knock off
for a smoke.
 When I said harness I didn't mean harness, snapped Rincewind. I meant, well I just meant that - I
dunno, I just can't think of the right words. I just think the world ought to be more sort of organised.
 That's just fantasy, said Twoflower.
 I know. That's the trouble. Rincewind sighed again. It was all very well going on about pure logic and
how the universe was ruled by logic and the harmony of numbers, but the plain fact of the matter was that
the disc was manifestly traversing space on the back of a giant turtle and the gods had a habit of going
round to atheists' houses and smashing their windows.
 There was a faint sound, hardly louder than the noise of the bees in the rosemary by the road. It had a
curiously bony quality, as of rolling skulls or a whirling dicebox. Rincewind peered around. There was
no-one nearby.
 For some reason that worried him.
 Then came a slight breeze, that grew and went in the space of a few heartbeats. It left the world
unchanged save in a few interesting particulars. There was now, for example, a five-metre tall mountain
troll standing in the road. It was exceptionally angry. This was partly because trolls generally are, in any
case, but it was exacerbated by the fact that the sudden and instantaneous teleportation from its lair in the
Rammerorck Mountains three thousand miles away and a thousand yards closer to the Rim had raised its
internal temperature to a dangerous level, in accordance with the laws of conservation of energy. So it
bared its fangs and charged.
 What a strange creature, Twoflower remarked,
 Is it dangerous?
 Only to people! shouted Rincewind. He drew his sword and, with a smooth overarm throw,
completely failed to hit the troll. The blade plunged on into the heather at the side of the track.
 There was the faintest of sounds, like the rattle of old teeth. The sword struck a boulder concealed in the
heather - concealed, a watcher might have considered, so artfully that a moment before it had not
appeared to be there at all. It sprang up like a leaping salmon and in mid-ricochet plunged deeply into the
back of the troll's grey neck.
 The creature grunted, and with one swipe of a claw gouged a wound in the flank of Twoflower's horse,
which screamed and bolted into the trees at the roadside. The troll spun around and made a grab for
Rincewind.
 Then its sluggish nervous system brought it the message that it was dead. It looked surprised for a
moment, and then toppled over and shattered into gravel (trolls being silicaceous lifeforms, their bodies
reverted instantly to stone at the moment of death).
 Aaargh, thought Rincewind as his horse reared in terror. He hung on desperately as it staggered
two-legged across the road and then, screaming, turned and galloped into the woods.
 The sound of hoofbeats died away, leaving the air to the hum of bees and the occasional rustle of
butterfly wings. There was another sound, too, a strange noise for the bright time of noonday.
 It sounded like dice.
 Rincewind?
 The long aisles of trees threw Twoflower's voice from side to side and eventually tossed it back to him,
unheeded. He sat down on a rock and tried to think.
 Firstly, he was lost. That was vexing, but it did not worry him unduly. The forest looked quite interesting
and probably held elves or gnomes, perhaps both. In fact on a couple of occasions he had thought he
had seen strange green faces peering down at him from the branches. Twoflower had always wanted to
meet an elf. In fact what he really wanted to meet was a dragon, but an elf would do. Or a real goblin.
 His Luggage was missing, and that was annoying. It was also starting to rain. He squirmed
uncomfortably on the damp stone, and tried to look on the bright side. for example, during its mad dash
his plunging horse had burst through some rushes and disturbed a she-bear with her cubs, but had gone
on before the bear could react. Then it had suddenly been galloping over the sleeping bodies of a large
wolf pack and, again, its mad speed had been such that the furious yelping had been left far behind.
Nevertheless, the day was wearing on and perhaps it would be a good idea - Twoflower thought - not to
hang about, in the open. Perhaps there was ahe racked his brains trying to remember what sort of
accommodation forests traditionally offered perhaps there was a ginger bread house or something?
 The stone really was uncomfortable. Twoflower looked down and, for the first time, noticed the strange
carving.
 It looked like a spider. Or was it a squid? Moss and lichens rather blurred the precise details. But they
didn't blur the runes carved below it. Twoflower could read them clearly, and they said

 Traveller
 the hospitable temple of
 Bel-Shamharoth
 lies one thousand paces Hubwards.

 Now this was strange, Twoflower realized, because although he could read the message the actual
letters were completely unknown to him. Somehow the message was arriving in his brain without the
tedious necessity of passing through his eyes.
 He stood up and untied his now-riddable horse from a sapling. He wasn't sure which way the Hub lay,
but there seemed to be an old track of sorts leading away between the trees. This Bel-Shamharoth
seemed prepared to go out of his way to help stranded travellers. In any case, it was that or the wolves.
Twoflower nodded decisively.
 It is interesting to note that, several hours later, a couple of wolves who were following Twoflower's
scent arrived in the glade. Their green eyes fell on the strange eight-legged carving - which may indeed
have been a spider, or an octopus, or may yet again have been something altogether more strange – and
they immediately decided that they weren't so hungry, at that.
 About three miles away a failed wizard was hanging by his hands from a high branch in a beech tree.
 This was the end result of five minutes of crowded activity. First, an enraged she-bear had barged
through the undergrowth and taken the throat out of his horse with one swipe of her paw. Then, as
Rincewind had fled the carnage, he had run into a glade in which a number of irate wolves were milling
about. His instructors at Unseen University, who had despaired of Rincewind's inability to master
levitation, would have then been amazed at the speed with which he reached and climbed the nearest
tree, without apparently touching it.
 Now there was just the matter of the snake.
 It was large and green, and wound itself along the branch with reptilian patience. Rincewind wondered if
it was poisonous, then chided himself for asking such a silly question. Of course it would be poisonous.
 What are you grinning for? he asked the figure on the next branch.
 I CAN'T HELP IT, said Death. NOW WOULD YOU BE SO KIND AS TO LET GO? I CAN'T
HANG AROUND ALL DAY.
 I can, said Rincewind defiantly.
 The wolves clustered around the base of the tree looked up with interest at their next meal talking to
himself.
 IT WON'T HURT, said Death. If words had weight, a single sentence from Death would have anchored
a ship.
 Rincewind's arms screamed their agony at him. He scowled at the vulture-like, slightly transparent figure.
 Won't hurt? he said. Being torn apart by wolves won't hurt?
 He noticed another branch crossing his dangerously narrowing one a few feet away. If he could just
reach it
 He swung himself forward, one hand outstretched. The branch, already bending, did not break. It simply
made a wet little sound and twisted. Rincewind found that he was now hanging on to the end of a tongue
of bark and fibre, lengthening as it peeled away from the tree. He looked down, and with a sort of fatal
satisfaction realized that he would land right on the biggest wolf.
 Now he was moving slowly as the bark peeled back in a longer and longer strip. The snake watched
him thoughtfully.
 But the growing length of bark held. Rincewind began to congratulate himself until, looking up, he saw
what he had hitherto not noticed. There was the largest hornets' nest he had ever seen, hanging right in his
path.
 He shut his eyes tightly.
 Why the troll? he asked himself. Everything else is just my usual luck, but why the troll? What the hell is
going on?
 Click. It may have been a twig snapping, except that the sound appeared to be inside Rincewind's head.
Click, click. And a breeze that failed to set a single leaf atremble.
 The hornets' nest was ripped from the branch as the strip passed by. It shot past the wizard's head and
he watched it grow smaller as it plummeted towards the circle of upturned muzzles.
 The circle suddenly closed.
 The circle suddenly expanded.
 The concerted yelp of pain as the pack fought to escape the furious cloud echoed among the trees.
Rincewind grinned inanely.
 Rincewind's elbow nudged something. It was the tree trunk. The strip had carried him right to the end of
the branch. But there were no other branches. The smooth bark beside him offered no handholds. It
offered hands, though. Two were even now thrusting through the mossy bark beside him; slim hands,
green as young leaves. Then a shapely arm followed, and then the hamadryad leaned right out and
grasped the astonished wizard firmly and, with that vegetable strength that can send roots questing into
rock, drew him into the tree. The solid bark parted like a mist, closed like a clam.
 Death watched impassively.
 He glanced at the cloud of mayflies that were dancing their joyful zigzags near His skull. He snapped His
fingers. The insects fell out of the air. But, somehow, it wasn't quite the same.

 Blind Io pushed his stack of chips across the table, glowered through such of his eyes that were currently
in the room, and strode out. A few demigods tittered. At least Offler had taken the loss of a perfectly
good troll with precise, if somewhat reptilian, grace.
 The Lady's last opponent shifted his seat until he faced her across the board.
 Lord, she said, politely.
 Lady, he acknowledged. Their eyes met.
 He was a taciturn god. It was said that he had arrived in the Discworld after some terrible and
mysterious incident in another Eventuality. It is of course the privilege of gods to control their apparent
outward form, even to other gods; the Fate of the Discworld was currently a kindly man in late middle
age, greying hair brushed neatly around features that a maiden would confidently proffer a glass of small
beer to, should they appear at her back door. It was a face a kindly youth would gladly help over a stile.
Except for his eyes, of course. No deity can disguise the manner and nature of his eyes. The nature of the
two eyes of the Fate of the Discworld was this that while at a mere glance they were simply dark, a
closer look would reveal - too late! - that they were but holes opening on to a blackness so remote, so
deep that the watcher would feel himself inexorably drawn into the twin pools of infinite night and their
terrible, wheeling stars
 The lady coughed politely, and laid twenty-one white chips on the table. Then from her robe she took
another chip, silvery and translucent and twice the size of the others. The soul of a true Hero always finds
a better rate of exchange, and is valued highly by the gods.
 Fate raised an eyebrow.
 And no cheating, Lady. he said.
 But who could cheat Fate? she asked. He shrugged.
 No-one. Yet everyone tries.
 And yet, again, I believe I felt you giving me a little assistance against the others?
 But of course. So that the endgame could be the sweeter, lady. And now
 He reached into his gaming box and brought forth a piece, setting it down on the board with a satisfied
air. The watching deities gave a collective sigh. Even the Lady was momentarily taken aback. it was
certainly ugly. The carving was uncertain, as if the craftsman's hands were shaking in horror of the thing
taking shape under his reluctant fingers. It seemed to be all suckers and tentacles. And mandibles, the
lady observed. And one great eye.
 I thought such as He died out at the beginnings of Time, she said.
 Mayhap our necrotic friend was loathe even to go near this one, laughed Fate. He was enjoying
himself.
 It should never have been spawned.
 Nevertheless, said Fate gnomically. He scooped the dice into their unusual box, and then glanced up at
her.
 Unless, he added, you wish to resign?
 She shook her head.
 Play, she said.
 You can match my stake?
 Play.

 Rincewind knew what was inside trees wood, sap, possibly squirrels. Not a palace.
 Still–the cushions underneath him were definitely softer than wood, the wine in the wooden cup beside
him was much tastier than sap, and there could be absolutely no comparison between a squirrel and the
girl sitting before him, clasping her knees and watching him thoughtfully, unless mention was made of
certain hints of furriness.
 The room was high, wide and lit with a soft yellow light which came from no particular source that
Rincewind could identify. Through gnarled and knotted archways he could see other rooms, and what
looked like a very large winding staircase. And it had looked a perfectly normal tree from the outside,
too.
 The girl was green – flesh green. Rincewind could be absolutely certain about that, because all she was
wearing was a medallion around her neck. Her long hair had a faintly mossy look about it. Her eyes had
no pupils and were a luminous green.
 Rincewind wished he had paid more attention to anthropology lectures at University.
 She had said nothing. Apart from indicating the couch and offering him the wine she had done no more
than sit watching him, occasionally rubbing a deep scratch on her arm.
 Rincewind hurriedly recalled that a dryad was so linked to her tree that she suffered wounds in
sympathy.
 Sorry about that, he said quickly. it was just an accident. I mean, there were these wolves, and-
 You had to climb my tree, and I rescued you, said the dryad smoothly. How lucky for you. And for
your friend, perhaps?
 Friend?
 The little man with the magic box, said the dryad.
 Oh, sure, him, said Rincewind vaguely. Yeah, I hope he's okay.
 He needs your help.
 He usually does. Did he make it to a tree too?
 He made it to the Temple of Bel-Shamharoth.
 Rincewind choked on his wine. His ears tried to crawl into his head in terror of the syllables they had just
heard. The Soul Eater–before he could stop them the memories came galloping back. Once, while a
student of practical magic at Unseen University, and for a bet, he'd slipped into the little room off the
main library - the room with walls covered in protective lead pentagrams, the room no-one was allowed
to occupy for more than four minutes and thirty-two seconds, which was a figure arrived at after two
hundred years of cautious experimentation.
 He had gingerly opened the Book, which was chained to the octiron pedestal in the middle of the
rune-strewn floor not lest someone steal it, but lest it escape for it was the Octavo, so full of magic that it
had its own vague sentience. One spell had indeed leapt from the crackling pages and lodged itself in the
dark recesses of his brain. And, apart from knowing that it was one of the Eight Great Spells, no-one
would know which one until he said it. Even Rincewind did not. But he could feel it sometimes, sidling out
of sight behind his Ego, biding its time
 On the front of the Octavo had been a representation of Bel-Shamharoth. He was not Evil, for even
EVIL has a certain vitality - Bel-Shamharoth was the flip side of the coin of which Good and Evil are but
one side.
 The Soul Eater. His number lyeth between seven and nine; it is twice four, Rincewind quoted, his mind
frozen with fear. Oh no. Where's the Temple?
 Hubwards, towards the centre of the forest, said the dryad. it is very old.
 But who would be so stupid as to worship Bel–him? I mean, devils yes, but he's the Soul Eater-
 There were – certain advantages. And the race that used to live in these parts had strange notions.
 What happened to them, then?
 I did say they used to live in these parts. The dryad stood up and stretched out her hand. Come. I am
Druellae. Come with me and watch your friend's fate. It should be interesting.
 I'm not sure that- began Rincewind.
 The dryad turned her green eyes on him.
 Do you believe you have a choice? she asked.
 A staircase broad as a major highway wound up through the tree, with vast rooms leading off at every
landing. The sourceless yellow light was everywhere. There was also a sound like - Rincewind
concentrated, trying to identify it- like far off thunder, or a distant waterfall.
 It's the tree, said the dryad shortly.
 What's it doing? said Rincewind.
 Living.
 I wondered about that. I mean, are we really in a tree? Have I been reduced in size? From outside it
looked narrow enough for me to put my arms around.
 It is.
 Um, but here I am inside it?
 You are.
 Um, said Rincewind.
 Druellae laughed.
 I can see into your mind, false wizard! Am I not a dryad? Do you not know that, what you belittle by
the name tree is but the mere four-dimensional analogue of a whole multidimensional universe which - no,
I can see you do not. I should have realised that you weren't a real wizard when I saw you didn't have a
staff.
 Lost it in a fire, lied Rincewind automatically.
 No hat with magic sigils embroidered on it.
 It blew off.
 No familiar.
 It died. Look, thanks for rescuing me, but if you don't mind I think I ought to be going. If you could
show me the way out-
 Something in her expression made him turn around. There were three he-dryads behind him. They were
as naked as the woman, and unarmed. That last fact was irrelevant, however. They didn't look as though
they would need weapons to fight Rincewind. They looked as though they could shoulder their way
through solid rock and beat up a regiment of trolls into the bargain. The three handsome giants looked
down at him with wooden menace. Their skins were the colour of walnut husks, and under it muscles
bulged like sacks of melons.
 He turned around again and grinned weakly at Druellae. Life was beginning to take on a familiar shape
again.
 I'm not rescued, am I? he said. I'm captured, right?
 Of course.
 And you're not letting me go? It was a statement.
 Druellae shook her head. You hurt the Tree. But you are lucky. Your friend is going to meet
Bel-Shamharoth. You will only die.
 From behind two hands gripped his shoulders in much the same way that an old tree root coils
relentlessly around a pebble.
 With a certain amount of ceremony, of course, the dryad went on. After the Sender of Eight has
finished with your friend.
 All Rincewind could manage to say was, You know, I never imagined there were he-dryads. Not even
in an oak tree.
 One of the giants grinned at him.
 Druellae snorted. Stupid! Where do you think acorns come from?

 There was a vast empty space like a hall, its roof lost in the golden haze. The endless stair ran right
through it.
 Several hundred dryads were clustered at the other end of the hall. They parted respectfully when
Druellae approached, and stared through Rincewind as he was propelled firmly along behind. Most of
them were females, although there were a few of the giant males among them. They stood like
god-shaped statues among the small, intelligent females. Insects, thought Rincewind. The Tree is like a
hive.
 But why were there dryads at all? As far as he could recall, the tree people had died out centuries
before. They had been out-evolved by humans, like most of the other Twilight Peoples. Only elves and
trolls had survived the coming of Man to the Discworld; the elves because they were altogether too
clever by half, and the troller-folk because they were at least as good as humans at being nasty, spiteful
and greedy. Dryads were supposed to have died out, along with gnomes and pixies.
 The background roar was louder here.
 Sometimes a pulsing golden glow would race up the translucent walls until it was lost in the haze
overhead. Some power in the air made it vibrate.
 Now incompetent wizard, said Druellae, see some magic. Not your weasel-faced tame magic, but
root-and-branch magic, the old magic. Wild magic. Watch.
 Fifty or so of the females formed a tight cluster, joined hands and walked backwards until they formed
the circumference of a large circle. The rest of the dryads began a low chant. Then, at a nod from
Druellae, the circle began to spin widdershins.
 As the pace began to quicken and the complicated threads of the chant began to rise Rincewind found
himself watching fascinated. He had heard about the Old Magic at University, although it was forbidden
to wizards. He knew that when the circle was spinning fast enough against the standing magical field of
the Discworld itself in its slow turning, the resulting astral friction would build up a vast potential
difference which would earth itself in a vast discharge of the Elemental Magical Force.
 The circle was a blur now, and the walls of the Tree rang with the echoes of the chant.
 Rincewind felt the familiar sticky prickling in the scalp that indicated the build-up of a heavy charge of
raw enchantment in the vicinity, and so he was not utterly amazed when, a few seconds later, a shaft of
vivid octarine light speared down from the invisible ceiling and focused, crackling, in the centre of the
circle.
 There it formed an image of a storm-swept, treegirt hill with a temple on its crest. Its shape did
unpleasant things to the eye.
 Rincewind knew that if it was a temple to Bel-Shamharoth it would have eight sides. (Eight was also the
Number of Bel-Shamharoth, which was why a sensible wizard would never mention the number if he
could avoid it. Or you'll be eight alive, apprentices were jocularly warned. Bel-Shamharoth was
especially attracted to dabblers in magic who, by being as it were beachcombers on the shores of the
unnatural were already half-enmeshed in his nets. Rincewind's room number in his hall of residence had
been 7a. He hadn't been surprised).
 Rain streamed off the black walls of the temple. The only sign of life was the horse tethered outside, and
it wasn't Twoflower's horse. For one thing, it was too big. It was a white charger with hooves the size of
meat dishes and leather harness aglitter with ostentatious gold ornamentation. It was currently enjoying a
nosebag.
 There was something familiar about it. Rincewind tried to remember where he had seen it before.
 It looked as though it was capable of a fair turn of speed, anyway. A speed which, once it had lumbered
up to it, it could maintain for a long time. All Rincewind had to do was shake off his guards, fight his way
out of the Tree, find the temple and steal the horse out from under whatever it was that Bel-Shamharoth
used for a nose.
 The Sender of Eight has two for dinner, it seems. said Druellae, looking hard at Rincewind. Who does
that steed belong to, false wizard?
 I've no idea.
 No? Well, it does not matter. We shall see soon enough.
 She waved a hand. The focus of the image moved inwards, darted through a great octagonal archway
and sped along the corridor within. There was a figure there, sidling along stealthily with its back against
one wall. Rincewind saw the gleam of gold and bronze.
 There was no mistaking that shape. He'd seen it many times. The wide chest, the neck like a treetrunk,
the surprisingly small head under its wild thatch of black hair looking like a tomato on a coffin he could
put a name to the creeping figure, and that name was Hrun the Barbarian.
 Hrun was one of the Circle Sea's more durable heroes a fighter of dragons, a despoiler of temples, a
hired sword, the kingpost of every street brawl, He could even - and unlike many heroes of Rincewind's
acquaintance - speak words of more than two syllables, if given time and maybe a hint or two.
 There was a sound on the edge of Rincewind's hearing. It sounded like several skulls bouncing down the
steps of some distant dungeon. He looked sideways at his guards to see if they had heard it. They had all
their limited attention focused on Hrun, who was admittedly built on the same lines as themselves. Their
hands were resting lightly on the wizard's shoulders.
 Rincewind ducked, jerked backwards like a tumbler, and came up running. Behind him he heard
Druellae shout, and he redoubled his speed. Something caught the hood of his robe, which tore off. A
he-dryad waiting at the stairs spread his arms, hurtling towards him. Without breaking his stride
Rincewind ducked again, so low that his chin was on a level with his knees, while a fist like a log sizzled
through the air by his ear.
 Ahead of him a whole spinney of the tree men awaited. He spun around, dodged another blow from the
puzzled guard, and sped back towards the circle, passing on the way the dryads who were pursuing him
and leaving them as disorganized as a set of skittles.
 But there were still more in front, pushing their way through the crowds of females and smacking their
fists into the horny palms of their hands with anticipatory concentration.
 Stand still, false wizard, said Druellae, stepping forward. Behind her the enchanted dancers spun on,
the focus of the circle was now drifting along a violet-lit corridor.
 Rincewind cracked.
 Will you knock that off, he snarled, Let's just get this Straight, right? I am, a real wizard! He stamped
a foot petulantly.
 Indeed? said the dryad. Then let us see you pass a spell.
 Uh- began Rincewind. The fact was that, since the ancient and mysterious spell had squatted in his
mind, he had been unable to remember even the simplest cantrap for, say, killing cockroaches or
scratching the small of his back without using his hands. The mages at Unseen University had tried to
explain this by suggesting that the involuntary memorising of the spell had, as it were, tied up all his
spell-retention cells. In his darker moments Rincewind had come up with his own explanation as to why
even minor spells refused to stay in his head for more than a few seconds.
 They were scared, he decided.
 Um- he repeated.
 A small one would do, said Druellae, watching him curl his lips in A frenzy of anger and
emberrassment. She signalled, and a couple of he-dryads closed in.
 The spell chose that moment to vault into the temporarily-abandoned saddle of Rincewind's
consciousness. He felt it sitting there, leering defiantly at him.
 I do know a spell, he said wearily.
 Yes? Pray tell, said Druellae.
 Rincewind wasn't sure that he dared, although the Spell was trying to take control of his tongue. He
fought it.
 You said you could read my mind, he said indistinctly. Read it.
 She stepped forward, looking mockingly into his eyes.
 Her smile froze. Her hands raised protectively, she crouched back. From her throat came a sound of
pure terror.
 Rincewind looked around. The rest of the dryads were also backing away. What had he done?
Something terrible, apparently.
 But in his experience it was only a matter of time before the normal balance of the universe restored itself
and started doing the usual terrible things to him. He backed away, ducked between the still-spinning
dryads who were creating the magic circle, and watched to see what Druellae would do next.
 Grab him, she screamed. Take him a long way from the Tree and kill him!
 Rincewind turned and bolted.
 Across the focus of the circle.
 There was a brilliant flash.
 There was a sudden darkness.
 There was a vaguely Rincewind-shaped violet shadow, dwindling to a point and winking out.
 There was nothing at all.

 Hrun the Barbarian crept soundlessly along the corridors, which were lit with a light so violet that it was
almost black. His earlier confusion was gone. This was obviously a magical temple, and that explained
everything.
 It explained why, earlier in the afternoon, he had espied a chest by the side of the track while riding
through this benighted forest. Its top was invitingly open, displaying much gold. But when he had leapt off
his horse to approach it the chest had sprouted legs and had gone trotting off into the forest, stopping
again a few hundred yards away.
 Now, after several hours of teasing pursuit, he had lost it in these hell-lit tunnels. On the whole, the
unpleasant carvings and occasional disjointed skeletons he passed held no fears for Hrun. This was partly
because he was not exceptionally bright while being at the same time exceptionally unimaginative, but it
was also because odd carvings and perilous tunnels were all in a day's work. He spent a great deal of
time in similar situations, seeking gold or demons or distressed virgins and relieving them respectively of
their owners, their lives and at least one cause of their distress.
 Observe Hrun, as he leaps cat-footed across a suspicious tunnel mouth. Even in this violet light his skin
gleams coppery. There is much gold about his person, in the form of anklets and wristlets, but otherwise
he is naked except for a leopardskin loincloth. He took that in the steaming forests of Howondaland,
after killing its owner with his teeth.
 In his right hand he carried the magical black sword Kring, which was forged from a thunderbolt and
had a soul but suffers no scabbard. Hrun had stolen it only three days before from the impregnable
palace of the Archmandrite of B'Ituni, and he was already regretting it. It was beginning to get on his
nerves.
 I tell you it went down that last passage on the right, hissed Kring in a voice like the scrape of a blade
over stone.
 Be silent!
 All I said was-
 Shut up!

 And Twoflower
 He was lost, he knew that. Either the building was much bigger than it looked, or he was now on some
wide underground level without having gone down any steps, or - as he was beginning to suspect - the
inner dimensions of the place disobeyed a fairly basic rule of architecture by being bigger than the
outside. And why all these strange lights? They were eight-sided crystals set at regular intervals in the
walls and ceiling, and they shed a rather unpleasant glow that didn't so much illuminate as outline the
darkness. And whoever had done those carvings on the wall, Twoflower thought charitably, had
probably been drinking too much. For years.
 On the other hand, it was certainly a fascinating building. Its builders had been obsessed with the number
eight. The floor was a continuous mosaic of eight-sided tiles, the corridor walls and ceilings were angled
to give the corridors eight sides if the walls and ceilings were counted and, in those places where part of
the masonry had fallen in Twoflower noticed that even the stones themselves had eight sides.
 I don't like it, said the picture imp, from his box around Twoflower's neck.
 Why not? inquired Twoflower.
 It's weird.
 But you're a demon. Demons can't call things weird. I mean, what's weird to a demon?
 Oh, you know, said the demon cautiously, glancing around nervously and shifting from claw to claw.
Things. Stuff.
 Twoflower looked at him sternly. What things?
 The demon coughed nervously (demons do not breathe, however, every intelligent being, whether it
breathes or not, coughs nervously at some time in its life. And this was one of them as far as the demon
was concerned). Oh, things, it said wretchedly. Evil things. Things we don't talk about is the point I'm
broadly trying to get across, master.
 Twoflower shook his head wearily. I wish Rincewind was here, he said. He'd know what to do.
 Him? sneered the demon. Can't see a wizard coming here. They can't have anything to do with the
number eight. The demon slapped a hand across his mouth guiltily.
 Twoflower looked up at the ceiling.
 What was that? he asked. Didn't you hear something?
 Me? Hear? No! Not a thing, the demon insisted.
 It jerked back into its box and slammed the door. Twoflower tapped on it. The door opened a crack.
 It sounded like a stone moving, he explained.
 The door banged shut. Twoflower shrugged.
 The place is probably falling to bits, he said to himself.
 He stood up.
 I say! he shouted. Is anyone there?
 AIR, Air, air, replied the dark tunnels.
 Hullo? he tried. lo, Lo, lo.
 I know there's someone here, I just heard you playing dice! 
 ICE, Ice, ice.
 Look, I had just-
 Twoflower stopped. The reason for this was the bright point of light that had popped into existence a
few feet from his eyes. It grew rapidly, and after a few seconds was the tiny bright shape of a man. At
this stage it began to make a noise, or, rather Twoflower started to hear the noise it had been making all
along. It sounded like a sliver of a scream, caught in one long instant of time.
 The iridescent man was doll-sized now, a tortured shape tumbling in slow motion while hanging in
mid-air. Twoflower wondered why he had thought of the phrase a sliver of a screamand began to
wish he hadn't.
 It was beginning to look like Rincewind. The wizard's mouth was open, and his face was brilliantly lit by
the light of – what? Strange suns, Twoflower found himself thinking. Suns men don't usually see. He
shivered.
 Now the turning wizard was half man-size. At that point the growth was faster, there was a sudden
crowded moment, a rush of air, and an explosion of sound. Rincewind tumbled out of the air, screaming.
He hit the floor hard, choked, then rolled over with his head cradled in his arms and his body curled up
tightly.
 When the dust had settled Twoflower reached out gingerly and tapped the wizard on the shoulder.
 The human ball rolled up tighter.
 It's me, explained Twoflower helpfully. The wizard unrolled a fraction.
 What? he said.
 Me.
 In one movement Rincewind unrolled and bounced up in front of the little man, his hands gripping his
shoulders desperately. His eyes were wild and wide.
 Don't say it! he hissed. Don't say it and we might get out! 
 Get out? How did you get in? Don't you know-
 Don't say it!
 Twoflower backed away from this madman
 Don't say it!
 Don't say what?
 The number.
 Number? said Twoflower. Hey, Rincewind-
 Yes, number! Between seven and nine. Four plus four
 What, ei–
 Rincewind's hands clapped over the man's mouth. Say it and we're doomed. Just don't think about,
right. Trust me!
 I don't understand, wailed Twoflower.
 Rincewind relaxed slightly; which was to say that he still made a violin string look like a bowl of jelly.
 Come on, he said. Let's try and get out. And I'll try and tell you.

 After the first Age of Magic the disposal of grimoires began to become a severe problem on the
Discworld. A spell is still a spell even when imprisoned temporarily in parchment and ink. It has potency.
This is not a problem while the book's owner still lives, but on his death the Spell book becomes a source
of uncontrolled power that cannot easily be defused.
 In short, spell books leak magic. Various solutions have been tried. Countries near the Rim simply
loaded down the books of dead mages with leaden pentagrams and threw them over the Edge. Near the
Hub less satisfactory alternatives were available. Inserting the offending books in canisters of negatively
polarized octiron and sinking them in the fathomless depths of the sea was one (burial in deep caves on
land was earlier ruled out after some districts complained of walking trees and five-headed cats) but
before long the magic seeped out and eventually fishermen complained of shoals of invisible fish or
psychic clams.
 A temporary solution was the construction, in various centres of magical lore, of large rooms made of
denatured octiron, which is impervious to most forms of magic. Here the more critical grimoires could be
stored until their potency had attenuated.
 That was how there came to be at Unseen University the Octavo, greatest of all grimoires, formerly
owned by the Creator of the Universe. It was this book that Rincewind had once opened for a bet. He
had only a second to stare at a page before setting off various alarm spells, but that was time enough for
one spell to leap from it and settle in his memory like a toad in a stone.

 Then what? said Twoflower.
 Oh, they dragged me out. Thrashed me, of course.
 And no-one knows what the spell does?
 Rincewind shook his head.
 It'd vanished from the page, he said. No-one will know until I say it. Or until I die, of course. Then it
will sort of say itself. For all I know it stops the universe, or ends Time, or anything.
 Twoflower patted him on the shoulder.
 No sense in brooding, he said cheerfully. Let's have another look for a way out.
 Rincewind shook his head. All the terror had been spent now. He had broken through the terror barrier,
perhaps, and was in the dead calm state of mind that lies on the other side. Anyway, he had ceased to
gibber.
 We're doomed, he stated. We've been walking around all night. I tell you, this place is a spiderweb. It
doesn't matter which way we go, we're heading twoards the centre.
 It was very kind of you to come looking for me, said Twoflower. How did you manage it it was very
impressive.
 Well, began the wizard awkwardly. I just 'I can't leave old Twoflower there' and-
 So what we've got to do now is find this Bel-Shamharoth person and explain things to him and perhaps
he'll let us out, said Twoflower.
 Rincewind ran a finger around his ear.
 It must be the funny echoes in here, he said. I thought I heard you use words like find and explain.
 That's right.
 Rincewind glared at him in the hellish purple glow. Find Bel-Shamharoth? he said.
 Yes. We don't have to get involved.
 Find the Soul Render and not get involved? Just give him a nod, I suppose, and ask the way to the exit?
Explain things to the Sender of Eignnnngh, Rincewind bit off the end of the word just in time and
finished, You're insane. Hey! Come back!
 He darted down the passage after Twoflower, and after a few moments came to a halt with a groan.
 The violet light was intense here, giving everything new and unpleasant colours. This wasn't a passage, it
was a wide room with walls to a number that Rincewind didn't dare to contemplate, and 7 passages
radiating from it.
 Rincewind saw, a little way off, a low altar with the Same number of sides as four times two. It didn't
occupy the centre of the room, however. The centre was occupied by a huge stone slab with twice as
many sides as a square. It looked massive. In the strange light it appeared to be slightly tilted with one
edge standing proud of the slabs around it.
 Twoflower was standing on it.
 Hey. Rincewind! Look what's here!
 The Luggage came ambling down one of the other passages that radiated from the room.
 That's great, said Rincewind. Fine. It can lead us out of here. Now.
 Twoflower was already rummaging in the chest
 Yes, he said. After I've taken a few pictures Just let me fit the attachment–
 I said now–
 Rincewind stopped. Hrun the Barbarian was standing in the passage mouth directly opposite him, a great
black sword held in one ham-sized fist.
 You? said Hrun uncertainly.
 Ahaha. Yes, said Rincewind. Hrun, isn't it? Long time no see. What brings you here?
 Hrun pointed to the luggage.
 That, he said. This much conversation seemed to exhaust Hrun. Then he added, in a tone that
combined statement, claim, threat and ultimatum Mine.
 It belongs to Twoflower here, said Rincewind.
 Here's a tip. Don't touch it.
 It dawned on him that this was precisely the wrong thing to say, but Hrun had already pushed
Twoflower away and was reaching for the Luggage which sprouted legs, backed away, and raised its
lid threateningly. In the uncertain light Rincewind thought he could see rows of enormous teeth, white as
bleached beechwood.
 Hrun, he said quickly, there's something I ought to tell you.
 Hrun turned a puzzled face to him.
 What? he said.
 It's about numbers. Look, you know if you add seven and one, or three and five, or take two from ten.
You get a number. While you're here don't say it and we might all stand a chance of getting out of here
alive. Or merely just dead.
 Who is he? asked Twoflower. He was holding a cage in his hands, dredged from the bottom-most
depths of the Luggage. It appeared to be full of sulking pink lizards.
 I am Hrun, said Hrun proudly. Then he looked at Rincewind.
 What? he said.
 Just don't say it, okay? said Rincewind.
 He looked at the sword in Hrun's hand. It was black, the sort of black that is less a colour than a
graveyard of colours, and there was a highly ornate runic inscription up the blade. More noticeable still
was the faint octarine glow that surrounded it. The sword must have noticed him, too, because it
suddenly spoke in a voice like a claw being scraped across glass.
 Strange, it said. Why can't he say eight?
 EIGHT, hate, ate said the echoes. There was the faintest of grinding noises, deep under the earth.
 And the echoes, although they became softer, refused to die away. They bounced from wall to wall,
crossing and recrossing, and the violet light flickered in time with the sound.
 You did it! screamed Rincewind. I said you shouldn't say eight!
 He stopped, appalled at himself. But the word was out now, and joined its colleagues in the general
susurration.
 Rincewind turned to run, but the air suddenly seemed to be thicker than treacle. A charge of magic
bigger than he had ever seen was building up; when he moved, in painful slow motion, his limbs left trails
of golden sparks that traced their shape in the air.
 Behind him there was a rumble as the great octagonal slab rose into the air, hung for a moment on one
edge, and crashed down on the floor.
 Something thin and black snaked out of the pit and wrapped itself around his ankle. He screamed as he
landed heavily on the vibrating flagstones. The tentacle started to pull him across the floor.
 Then Twoflower was in front of him, reaching out for his hands. He grasped the little man's arms
desperately and they lay looking into each other's faces. Rincewind slid on, even so.
 What's holding you? he gasped.
 N-nothing! said Twoflower. What's happening?
 I'm being dragged into this pit, what do you think?
 Oh Rincewind, I'm sorry-
 You're sorry-
 There was a noise like a singing saw and the pressure on Rincewind's legs abruptly ceased. He turned
his head and saw Hrun crouched by the pit, his sword a blur as it hacked at the tentacles racing out
towards him.
 Twoflower helped the wizard to his feet and they crouched by the altar stone, watching the manic figure
as it battled the questing arms.
 It won't work, said Rincewind. The Sender can materialise tentacles. What are you doing?
 Twoflower was feverishly attaching the cage of subdued lizards to the picture box, which he had
mounted on a tripod.
 I've just got to get a picture of this, he muttered.
 It's stupendous! Can you hear me, imp?
 The picture imp opened his tiny hatch, glanced momentarily at the scene around the pit, and vanished
into the box. Rincewind jumped as something touched his leg, and brought his heel down on a questing
tentacle.
 Come on, he said. Time to go zoom. He grabbed Twoflower's arm, but the tourist resisted.
 Run away and leave Hrun with that thing? he said.
 Rincewind looked blank. Why not? he said. it's his job.
 But it'll kill him,
 It could be worse, said Rincewind.
 What?
 It could be us, Rincewind pointed out logically.
 Come on!
 Twoflower pointed. Hey he said. It's got my Luggage! 
 Before Rincewind could restrain him Twoflower ran around the edge of the pit to the box, which was
being dragged across the floor while its lid snapped ineffectually at the tentacle that held it. The little man
began to kick at the tentacle in fury. Another one snapped out of the melee around Hrun and caught him
around the waist. Hrun himself was already an indistinct shape amid the tightening coils. Even as
Rincewind stared in horor the Hero's sword was wrenched from his grasp and hurled against a wall.
 Your spell! shouted Twoflower.
 Rincewind did not move. He was looking at the Thing rising out of the pit. It was an enormous eye, and
it was staring directly at him. He whimpered as a tentacle fastened itself around his waist. The words of
the spell rose unbidden in his throat. He opened his mouth as in a dream, shaping it around the first
barbaric syllable. Another tentacle shot out like a whip and coiled around his throat, choking him.
Staggering and gasping, Rincewind was dragged across the floor.
 One flailing arm caught Twoflower's picture box as it skittered past on its tripod. He snatched it up
instinctively, as his ancestors might have snatched up a stone when faced with a marauding tiger. If only
he could get enough room to swing it against the Eye
 the Eye filled the whole universe in front of him. Rincewind felt his will draining away like water from a
sieve.
 In front of him the torpid lizards stirred in their cage on the picture box. Irrationally, as a man about to be
beheaded notices every scratch and stain on the executioner's block, Rincewind saw that they had
overlarge tails that were bluish-white and, he realized, throbbing alarmingly. As he was drawn towards
the Eye the terrors-truck Rincewind raised the box protectively, and at the same time heard the picture
imp say
 They're about ripe now, can't hold them any longer. Everyone smile, please.
 There was a flash of light so white and so bright it didn't seem like light at all.
 Bel-Shamharoth screamed, a sound that started in the far ultrasonic and finished somewhere in
Rincewind's bowels. The tentacles went momentarily as stiff as rods, hurling their various cargoes around
the room, before bunching up protectively in front of the abused Eye. The whole mass dropped into the
pit and a moment later the big slab was snatched up by several dozen tentacles and slammed into place,
leaving a number of thrashing limbs trapped around the edge.
 Hrun landed rolling, bounced off a wall and came up on his feet. He found his sword and started to chop
methodically at the doomed arms.
 Rincewind lay on the floor, concentrating on not going mad. A hollow wooden noise made him turn his
head.
 The Luggage had landed on its curved lid. Now it was rocking angrily and kicking its little legs in the air.
 Warily, Rincewind looked around for Twoflower The little man was in a crumpled heap against the wall,
but at least he was groaning.
 The wizard pulled himself across the floor painfully, and whispered, What the hell was that?
 Why were they so bright? muttered Twoflower
 God, my head
 Too bright? said Rincewind. He looked across the floor to the cage on the picture box. The lizards
inside, now noticeably thinner, were watching him with interest.
 The salamanders, moaned Twoflower. The picture'll be over-exposed, I know it
 They're salamanders? asked Rincewind incredulously.
 Of course. Standard attachment.
 Rincewind staggered across to the box and picked it up. He'd seen salamanders before, of course, but
they had been small specimens. They had also been floating in a jar of pickle in the curiobiological
museum down in the cellars of Unseen University, since live salamanders were extinct around the Circle
Sea.
 He tried to remember the little he knew about them. They were magical creatures. They also had no
mouths, since they subsisted entirely on the nourishing quality of the octarine wavelength in the
Discworld's sunlight, which they absorbed through their skins. Of course, they also absorbed the rest of
the sunlight as well, storing it in a special sac until it was excreted in the normal way. A desert inhabited
by discworld salamanders was a veritable lighthouse at night.
 Rincewind put them down and nodded grimly. With all the octarine light in this magical place the
creatures had been gorging themselves, and then nature had taken its course.
 The picture box sidled away on its tripod. Rincewind aimed a kick at it, and missed. He was beginning
to dislike sapient pearwood. Something small stung his cheek. He brushed it away irritably.
 He looked around at a sudden grinding noise, and a voice like a carving knife cutting through silk said,
This is very undignified.
 Shuddup, Said Hrun. He was using Kring to lever the top off the altar. He looked up at Rincewind and
grinned. Rincewind hoped that rictus-strung grimace was a grin.
 Mighty magic, commented the barbarian, pushing down heavily on the complaining blade with a hand
the size of a ham. Now we share the treasure eh?
 Rincewind grunted as something small and hard struck his ear. There was a gust of wind, hardly felt.
 How do you know there's treasure in there? he said.
 Hrun heaved, and managed to hook his fingers under the stone. You find chokeapples under a
chokeapple tree, he said. You find treasure under altars. Logic.
 He gritted his teeth. The stone swung up and landed heavily on the floor.
 This time something struck Rincewind's hand heavily. He clawed at the air and looked at the thing he had
caught. It was a piece of stone with five-plus-three sides. He looked up at the ceiling Should it be sagging
like that? Hrun hummed a little tune as he began to pull crumbling leather from the desecrated altar.
 The air crackled, fluoresced, hummed. Intangible winds gripped the wizard's robe, flapping it out in
eddies of blue and green sparks. Around Rincewind's head mad, half-formed spirits howled and
gibbered as they were sucked past.
 He tried raising a hand. It was immediately surrounded by a glowing octarine corona as the rising
magical wind roared past. The gale raced through the room without stirring one iota of dust, yet it was
blowing Rincewind's eyelids inside out. It screamed along the tunnels, its banshee-wail bouncing madly
from stone to stone.
 Twoflower staggered up, bent double in the teeth of the astral gale.
 What the hell is this? he shouted.
 Rincewind half-turned. Immediately the howling wind caught him, nearly pitching him over. Poltergeist
eddies, spinning in the rushing air, snatched at his feet.
 Hrun's arm shot out and caught him. A moment later he and Twoflower had been dragged into the lee of
the ravaged altar, and lay panting on the floor. Beside them the talking sword Kring sparkled, its magical
field boosted a hundredfold by the storm.
 Hold on! screamed Rincewind.
 The wind! shouted Twoflower. Where's it coming from? Where's it blowing to? He looked into
Rincewind's mask of sheer terror, which made him redouble his own grip on the stones.
 We're doomed, murmured Rincewind, while overhead the roof cracked and shifted. Where do
Shadows come from? That's where the wind is blowing.
 What was in fact happening, as the wizard knew, was that as the abused spirit of Bel-Shamharoth sank
through the deeper chthonic planes his brooding spirit was being sucked out of the very stones into the
region which, according to the Discworld's most reliable priests, was both under the ground and
Somewhere Else. In consequence his temple was being abandoned to the ravages of Time, who for
thousands of shamefaced years had been reluctant to go near the place. Now the suddenly released,
accumulated weight of all those pent-up seconds was bearing down heavily on the unbraced stones.
 Hrun glanced up at the widening cracks and sighed. Then he put two fingers into his mouth and whistled.
 Strangely the real sound rang out loudly over the pseudosound of the widening astral whirlpool that was
forming in the middle of the great octagonal slab. It was followed by a hollow echo which sounded, he
fancied, strangely like the bouncing of strange bones. Then came a noise with no hint of strangeness. it
was hollow hoofbeats.
 Hrun's warhorse cantered through a creaking archway and reared up by its master, its mane streaming in
the gale. The barbarian pulled himself to his feet and slung his treasure bags into a sack that hung from the
saddle, then hauled himself onto the beast's back. He reached down and grabbed Twoflower by the
scruff of his neck dragging him across the saddle tree. As the horse turned around Rincewind took a
desperate leap and landed behind Hrun, who raised no objection. The horse pounded surefooted along
the tunnels leaping sudden slides of rubble and adroitly side stepping huge stones as they thundered down
from the straining roof. Rincewind, clinging on grimly looked behind them.
 No wonder the horse was moving so swiftly close behind, speeding through the flickering violet light,
were a large ominous-looking chest and a picture box that skittered along dangerously on its three legs.
So great was the ability of sapient pearwood to follow its master anywhere, the grave goods of dead
emperors had traditionally been made of it
 They reached the outer air a moment before the octagonal arch finally broke and smashed into the flags.
 The sun was rising. Behind them a column of dust rose as the temple collapsed in on itself, but they did
not look back. That was a shame, because Twoflower might have been able to obtain pictures unusual
even by discworld standards.
 There was movement in the smoking ruins. They seemed to be growing a green carpet. Then an oak tree
spiralled up, branching out like an exploding green rocket, and was in the middle of a venerable copse
even before the tips of its aged branches had stopped quivering. A beech burst out like a fungus,
matured, rotted, and fell in a cloud of tinder dust amid its struggling offspring. Already the temple was a
half-buried heap of mossy stones.
 But Time, having initially gone for the throat, was now setting out to complete the job. The boiling
interface between decaying magic and ascendant entropy roared down the hill and overtook the galloping
horse, whose riders, being themselves creatures of Time, completely failed to notice it. But it lashed into
the enchanted forest with the whip of centuries.
 Impressive, isn't it? observed a voice by Rincewind's knee as the horse cantered through the haze of
decaying timber and falling leaves.
 The voice had an eerie metallic ring to it.
 Rincewind looked down at Kring the sword. It had a couple of rubies set in the pommel. He got the
impression they were watching him.

 From the moorland rimwards of the wood they watched the battle between the trees and Time, which
could only have one ending. It was a sort of cabaret to the main business of the halt, which Was the
consumption of quite a lot of a bear which had incautiously come within bowshot of Hrun.
 Rincewind watched Hrun over the top of his slab of greasy meat. Hrun going about the business of being
a hero, he realised, was quite different to the wine-bibbing, carousing Hrun who occasionally came to
Ankh-Morpork. He was cat-cautious, lithe as a panther, and thoroughly at home.
 And I've survived Bel-Shamharoth, Rincewind reminded himself. Fantastic.
 Twoflower was helping the hero sort through the treasure stolen from the temple. It was mostly silver set
with unpleasant purple stones. Representations of spiders, octopi and the tree-dwelling octarsier of the
hubland wastes figured largely in the heap.
 Rincewind tried to shut his ears to the grating voice beside him. It was no use.
 -and then I belonged to the Pasha of Re'durat and played a prominent part in the battle of the Great
Nef, which is where I received the slight nick you may have noticed some two-thirds of the way up my
blade, Kring was saying from its temporary home in a tussock. Some infidel was wearing an octiron
collar, most unsporting, and of course I was a lot sharper in those days and my master used to use me to
cut silk handkerchiefs in mid-air and - am I boring you?
 Huh? Oh, no, no, not at all. It's all very interesting, said Rincewind, with his eyes still on Hrun. How
trustworthy would he be? Here they were, out in the wilds, there were trolls about I could see you
were a cultured person, Kring went on.  seldom do I get to meet really interesting people, for any length
of time, anyway. What I'd really like is a nice mantelpiece to hang over, somewhere nice and quiet. I
spent a couple of hundred years on the bottom of a lake once.
 That must have been fun, said Rincewind absently.
 Not really, said Kring.
 No, I suppose not.
 What I'd really like is to be a ploughshare. I don't know what that is, but it sounds like an existence with
some point to it.
 Twoflower hurried over to the wizard
 I had a great idea, he burbled.
 Yah, said Rincewind, wearily. Why don't we get Hrun to accompany us to Quirm?
 Twoflower looked amazed. How did you know? he said. I just thought you'd think it, said
Rincewind.
 Hrun ceased stuffing silverware into his saddlebags and grinned encouragingly at them. Then his eyes
strayed back to the Luggage.
 If we had him with us, who'd attack us? said Twoflower.
 Rincewind scratched his chin. Hrun? he suggested.
 But we saved his life in the Temple!
 Well, if by attack you mean kill, said Rincewind, I don't think he'd do that. He's not that sort. He'd
just rob us and tie us up and leave us for the wolves, I expect.
 Oh, come on.
 Look, this is real life, snapped Rincewind. I mean, here you are, carrying around a box full of gold,
don't you think anyone in their right minds would jump at the chance of pinching it?I would, he added
mentally –if I hadn't seen what the Luggage does to prying fingers.
 Then the answer hit him. He looked from Hrun to the picture box. The picture imp was doing its laundry
in a tiny tub, while the salamanders dozed in their cage.
 I've got an idea, he said. I mean, what is it heroes really want?
 Gold? said Twoflower.
 No. I mean really want.
 Twoflower frowned. I don't quite understand, he said.
 Rincewind picked up the picture box. Hrun, he said. Come over here, will you?

 The days passed peacefully. True, a small band of bridge trolls tried to ambush them on one occasion,
and a party of brigands nearly caught them unawares one night (but unwisely tried to investigate the
Luggage before slaughtering the sleepers). Hrun demanded, and got, double pay for both occasions.
 If any harm comes to us, said Rincewind, then there will be no-one to operate the magic box. No
more pictures of Hrun, you understand?
 Hrun nodded, his eyes fixed on the latest picture. It showed Hrun striking a heroic pose, with one foot
on a heap of slain trolls.
 Me and you and little friend Twoflowers, we all get on hokay, he said. Also tomorrow, may we get a
better profile, hokay?
 He carefully wrapped the picture in trollskin and stowed it in his saddlebag, along with the others.
 It seems to be working, said Twoflower admiringly, as Hrun rode ahead to scout the road.
 Sure, said Rincewind. What heroes like best is themselves.
 You're getting quite good at using the picture box, you know that?
 Yar.
 So you might like to have this. Twoflower held out a picture.
 What is it? asked Rincewind.
 Oh, just the picture you took in the temple.
 Rincewind looked in horror. There, bordered by a few glimpses of tentacle, was a huge, whorled,
calloused, potion-stained and unfocused thumb.
 That's the story of my life, he said wearily.

 You win, said Fate, pushing the heap of souls across the gaming table. The assembled gods relaxed.
There will be other games, he added.
 The Lady smiled into two eyes that were like holes in the universe.

 And then there was nothing but the ruin of the forests and a cloud of dust on the horizon, which drifted
away on the breeze. And, sitting on a pitted and moss-grown milestone, a black and raggedy figure. His
was the air of one who is unjustly put upon, who is dreaded and feared, yet who is the only friend of the
poor and the best doctor for the mortally wounded.
 Death, although of course completely eyeless, watched Rincewind disappearing with what would, had
His face possessed any mobility at all, have been a frown. Death, although exceptionally busy at all times,
decided that He now had a hobby. There was something about the wizard that irked Him beyond
measure. He didn't keepappointments for one thing.
 I'LL GET YOU YET, CULLY, said Death, in the voice like the slamming of leaden coffin lids.

 The Lure of the Wyrm

 It was called the Wyrmberg and it rose almost one half of a mile above the green valley; a mountain
huge, grey and upside down.
 At its base it was a mere score of yards across. Then it rose through clinging cloud, curving gracefully
outward like an upturned trumpet until it was truncated by a plateau fully a quarter of a mile across. There
was a tiny forest up there, its greenery cascading over the lip. There were buildings. There was even a
small river, tumbling over the edge in a waterfall so wind-whipped that it reached the ground as rain.
 There were also a number of cave mouths, a few yards below the plateau. They had a crudely-carved,
regular look about them, so that on this crisp autumn morning the Wyrmberg hung over the clouds like a
giant's dovecote.
 This would mean that the doves had a wingspan slightly in excess of forty yards.

 I knew it, said Rincewind. We're in a strong magical field.
 Twoflower and Hrun looked around the little hollow where they had made their noonday halt. Then they
looked at each other.
 The horses were quietly cropping the rich grass by the stream. Yellow butterflies skittered among the
bushes. There was a smell of thyme and a buzzing of bees. The wild pigs on the spit sizzled gently.
 Hrun shrugged and went back to oiling his biceps. They gleamed.
 Looks alright to me, he said.
 Try tossing a coin, said Rincewind.
 What?
 Go on. Toss a coin.
 Hokay, Said Hrun. if it gives you any pleasure.
 He reached into his pouch and withdrew a handful of loose change plundered from a dozen realms.
 With some care he selected a Zchloty leaden quarter-iotum and balanced it on a purple thumbnail.
 You call, he said. Heads or- he inspected the obverse with an air of intense concentration, some sort
of a fish with legs.
 When it's in the air, said Rincewind. Hrun grinned and flicked his thumb. The iotum rose, spinning.
 Edge, said Rincewind, without looking at it.

 Magic never dies. It merely fades away.
 Nowhere was this more evident on the wide blue expanse of the Discworld than in those areas that had
been the scene of the great battles of the Mage Wars, which had happened very shortly after Creation. In
those days magic in its raw state had been widely available, and had been eagerly utilized by the First
Men in their war against the Gods.
 The precise origins of the Mage Wars have been lost in the fogs of Time, but disc philosophers agree
that the First Men, shortly after their creation, understandably lost their temper. And great and
pyrotechnic were the battles that followed - the sun wheeled across the sky, the seas boiled, weird
storms ravaged the land, small white pigeons mysteriously appeared in people's clothing, and the very
stability of the disc (carried as it was through space on the backs of four giant turtle-riding elephants) was
threatened. This resulted in stern action by the Old High Ones, to whom even the Gods themselves are
answerable. The Gods were banished to high places, men were re-created a good deal smaller, and
much of the old wild magic was sucked out of the earth.
 That did not solve the problem of those places on the disc which, during the wars, had suffered a direct
hit by a spell. The magic faded away slowly, over the millenia, releasing as it decayed myriads of
sub-astral particles that severely distorted the reality around it

 Rincewind, Twoflower and Hrun stared at the coin.
 Edge it is, said Hrun. Well, you're a wizard. So what?
 I don't do – that sort of spell.
 You mean you can't.
 Rincewind ignored this, because it was true. Try it again, he suggested.
 Hrun pulled out a fistful of coins.
 The first two landed in the usual manner. So did the fourth. The third landed on its edge and balanced
there. The fifth turned into a small yellow caterpillar and crawled away. The sixth, upon reaching its
zenith, vanished with a sharp spang!
 A moment later there was a small thunder clap.
 Hey, that one was silver, exclaimed Hrun, rising to his feet and staring upwards. Bring it back!
 I don't know where it's gone, said Rincewind wearily. it's probably still accelerating. The ones I tried
this morning didn't come down, anyway.
 Hrun was still staring into the sky.
 What? said Twoflower.
 Rincewind sighed. He had been dreading this.
 We've strayed into a zone with a high magical index, he said. Don't ask me how. Once upon a time a
really powerful magic field must have been generated here, and we're feeling the after-effects.
 Precisely, said a passing bush.
 Hrun's head jerked down.
 You mean this is one of those places? he asked.
 Let's get out of here!
 Right, agreed Rincewind. if we retrace our steps we might make it. We can stop every mile or so and
toss a coin.
 He stood up urgently and started stuffing things into his saddlebags.
 What? said Twoflower.
 Rincewind stopped. Look, he snapped. Just don't argue. Come on.
 It looks alright, said Twoflower. Just a bit underpopulated that's all
 Yes, said Rincewind. Odd, isn't it? Come on!
 There was a noise high above them, like a strip of leather being slapped on a wet rock. Something glassy
and indistinct passed over Rincewind's head, throwing up a cloud of ashes from the fire, and the pig
carcass took off from the spit and rocketed into the sky.
 It banked to avoid a clump of trees, righted itself, roared around in a tight circle, and headed hubwards
leaving a trail of hot pork-fat droplets.

 What are they doing now? asked the old man.
 The young woman glanced at the scrying glass. Heading rimwards at speed, she reported. By the way
– they've still got that box on legs.
 The old man chuckled, an oddly disturbing sound in the dark and dusty crypt. Sapient pearwood, he
said. Remarkable. Yes, I think we will have that. Please see to it, my dear – before they go beyond your
power, perhaps?
 Silence! Or–
 Or what, Liessa? said the old man (in this dim light there was something odd about the way he was
slumped in the stone chair). You killed me once already, remember?
 She snorted and stood up, tossing back her hair scornfully. It was red, flecked with gold. Erect, Liessa
Wyrmbidder was entirely a magnificent sight. She was also almost naked, except for a couple of mere
scraps of the lightest chain mail and riding boots of iridescent dragonhide. In one boot was thrust a riding
crop, unusual in that it was as long as a spear and tipped with tiny steel barbs.
 My power will be quite sufficient, she said.
 The indistinct figure appeared to nod, or at least to wobble. So you keep assuring me, he said.
 Liessa snorted, and strode out of the hall.
 Her father did not bother to watch her go. One reason for this was, of course, that since he had been
dead for three months his eyes were in any case not in the best of condition. The other was that as a
wizard - even a dead wizard of the fifteenth grade, his optic nerves had long since become attuned to
seeing into levels and dimensions far removed from common reality, and were therefore somewhat
inefficient at observing the merely mundane. (During his life they had appeared to others to be
eight-faceted and eerily insectile.) Besides, since he was now suspended in the narrow space between
the living world and the dark shadow-world of Death he could survey the whole of Causality itself. That
was why, apart from a mild hope that this time his wretched daughter would get herself killed, he did not
devote his considerable powers to learning more about the three travellers galloping desperately out of
his realm.
 Several hundred yards away, Liessa was in a strange humour as she strode down the worn steps that led
into the hollow heart of the Wyrmberg followed by half a dozen Riders. Would this be the opportunity?
Perhaps here was the key to break the deadlock, the key to the throne of the Wyrmberg. It was rightfully
hers, of course; but tradition said that only a man could rule the Wyrmberg. That irked Liessa, and when
she was angry the Power flowed stronger and the dragons were especially big and ugly.
 If she had a man, things would be different Someone who, for preference, was a big strapping lad but
short on brains. Someone who would do what he was told.
 The biggest of the three now fleeing the dragonlands might do. And if it turned out that he wouldn't, then
dragons were always hungry and needed to be fed regularly. She could see to it that they got ugly.
 Uglier than usual, anyway.
 The stairway passed through a stone arch and ended in a narrow ledge near the roof of the great cavern
where the Wyrms roosted.
 Sunbeams from the myriad entrances around the walls cries-crossed the dusty gloom like amber rods in
which a million golden insects had been preserved. Below, they revealed nothing but a thin haze.
Above
 The walking rings started so close to Liessa's head that she could reach up and touch one. They
stretched away in their thousands across the upturned acres of the cavern roof. It had taken a score of
masons a score of years to hammer the pitons for all those, hanging from their work as they progressed.
Yet they were as nothing compared to the eighty-eight major rings that clustered near the apex of the
dome. A further fifty had been lost in the old days, as they were swung into place by teams of sweating
slaves (and there had been slaves aplenty, in the first days of the Power) and the great rings had gone
crashing into the depths, dragging their unfortunate manipulators with them.
 But eighty-eight had been installed, huge as rainbows, rusty as blood. From them the dragons sense
Liessa's presence. Air swishes around the cavern as eighty-eight pairs of wings unfold like a complicated
puzzle. Great heads with green, multi-faceted eyes peer down at her. The beasts were still faintly
transparent. While the men around her take their hookboots from the rack. Liessa bends her mind to the
task of full visualisation; about her in the musty air the dragons become fully visible, bronze scales dully
reflecting the sunbeam shafts. Her mind throbs, but now that the Power is flowing fully she can, with
barely a wander of concentration, think of other things.
 Now she too buckles on the hookboots and turns a graceful cartwheel to bring their hooks, with a faint
clung, against a couple of the walking rings in the ceiling.
 Only now it is the floor. The world has changed. Now she is standing on the edge of a deep bowl or
crater, floored with the little rings across which the dragonriders are already strolling with a pendulum grit.
In the centre of the bowl their huge mounts wait among the herd. Far above are the distant rocks of the
cavern floor, discoloured by centuries of dragon droppings.
 Moving with the easy gliding movement that is second nature Liessa sets off towards her own dragon,
Laolith, who turns his great horsey head towards her. His jowls are greasy with pork fat. It was very
enjoyable, he says in her mind.
 I thought I said there were to be no unaccompanied flights? she snaps.
 I was hungry, Liessa.
 Curb your hunger. Soon there will be horses to eat.
 The reins stick in our teeth. Are there any warriors? We like warriors.
 Liessa swings down the mounting ladder and lands with her legs locked around Laolith's leathery neck.
 The warrior is mine. There are a couple of others you can have. One appears to be a wizard of sorts,
she adds by way of encouragement.
 Oh, you know how it is with wizards. Half an hour afterwards you could do with another one, the
dragon grumbles.
 He spreads his wings and drops.

 They're gaining, screamed Rincewind. He bent even lower over his horse's neck and groaned.
Twoflower was trying to keep up while at the same time craning round to look at the flying beasts.
 You don't understand! screamed the tourist, above the terrible noise of the wingbeats. All my life I've
wanted to see dragons!
 From the inside? shouted Rincewind. Shut up and ride! He whipped at his horse with the reins and
stared at the woods ahead, trying to drag it closer by sheer willpower. Under those trees they'd be safe.
Under those trees no dragons could fly He heard the clap of wings before shadows folded around him.
Instinctively he rolled in the saddle and felt the white-hot stab of pain as something sharp scored a line
across his shoulders.
 Behind him Hrun screamed, but it sounded more like a bellow of rage than a cry of pain. The barbarian
had vaulted down into the heather and had drawn the black sword, Kring. He flourished it as one of the
dragons curved in for another low pass.
 No bloody lizard does that to me! he roared.
 Rincewind leaned over and grabbed Twoflower's reins.
 Come on, he hissed.
 But, the dragons– said Twoflower, entranced.
 Blast the– began the wizard, and froze. Another dragon had peeled off from the circling dots overhead
and was gliding towards them. Rincewind let go of Twoflower's horse, swore bitterly, and spurred his
own mount towards the trees, alone. He didn't look back at the sudden commotion behind him and,
when a shadow passed over him, merely gibbered weakly and tried to burrow into the horse's mane.
 Then, instead of the searing, piercing pain he had expected, there was a series of stinging blows as the
terrified animal passed under the leaves of the wood. The wizard tried to hang on but another low
branch, stouter than the others, knocked him out of the saddle. The last thing he heard before the flashing
blue lights of unconsciousness closed in was a high reptilian scream of frustration, and the thrashing of
talons in the treetops.
 When he awoke a dragon was watching him; at least, it was staring in his general direction. Rincewind
groaned and tried to dig his way into the moss with his shoulderblades, then gasped as the pain hit him.
 Through the mists of agony and fear he looked back at the dragon.
 The creature was hanging from a branch of a large dead oak tree, several hundred feet away. Its
bronze-gold wings were tightly wrapped around its body but the long equine head turned this way and
that at the end of a remarkably prehensile neck. It was scanning the forest.
 It was also semi-transparent. Although the sun glinted off its scales, Rincewind could clearly make out
the outlines of the branches behind it. On one of them a man was sitting, dwarfed by the hanging reptile.
He appeared to be naked except for a pair of high boots, a tiny leather holdall in the region of his groin,
and a high-crested helmet. He was swinging a short sword back and forth idly, and stared out across the
tree tops with the air of one carrying out a tedious and unglamorous assignment.
 A beetle began to crawl laboriously up Rincewind's leg.
 The wizard wondered how much damage a half solid dragon could do. Would it only half-kill him? He
decided not to stay and find out.
 Moving on heels, fingertips and shoulder muscles, Rincewind wriggled sideways until foliage masked the
oak and its occupants. Then he scrambled to his feet and hared off between the trees.
 He had no destination in mind, no provisions, and no horse. But while he still had legs he could run.
Ferns and brambles whipped at him, but he didn't feel them at all.
 When he had put about a mile between him and the dragon he stopped and collapsed against a tree,
which then spoke to him.
 Psst, it said.
 Dreading what he might see, Rincewind let his gaze slide upwards. It tried to fasten on innocuous bits of
bark and leaf, but the scourge of curiosity forced it to leave them behind. Finally it fixed on a black sword
thrust straight through the branch above Rincewind's head.
 Don't just stand there, said the sword (in a voice like the sound of a finger dragged around the rim of a
large empty wine glass). Pull me out.
 What? said Rincewind, his chest still heaving.
 Pull me out, repeated Kring. It's either that or I'll be spending the next million years in a coal measure.
Did I ever tell you about the time I was thrown into a lake up in th–
 What happened to the others? said Rincewind, still clutching the tree desperately.
 Oh, the dragons got them. And the horses. And that box thing. Me too, except that Hrun dropped me.
What a stroke of luck for you.
 Well- began Rincewind. Kring ignored him.
 I expect you'll be in a hurry to rescue them, it added.
 Yes, well-
 So if you'll just pull me out we can be off.
 Rincewind squinted up at the sword. A rescue attempt had hitherto been so far at the back of his mind
that, if some advanced speculations on the nature and shape of the many-dimensioned multiplexity of the
universe were correct, it was right at the front; but a magic sword was a valuable item
 And it would be a long trek back home, wherever that was
 He scrambled up the tree and inched along the branch. Kring was buried very firmly in the wood. He
gripped the pommel and heaved until lights flashed in front of his eyes.
 Try again, said the sword encouragingly.
 Rincewind groaned and gritted his teeth.
 Could be worse, said Kring. This could have been an anvil.
 Yaargh, hissed the wizard, fearing for the future of his groin.
 I have had a multidimensional existence, said the sword.
 Ungh?
 I have had many names, you know.
 Amazing, said Rincewind. He swayed backwards as the blade slid free. It felt strangely light. back on
the ground again he decided to break the news. I really don't think rescue is a good idea, he said. I
think we'd better head back to a city, you know. To raise a search party.
 The dragons headed hubwards, said Kring.
 However, I suggest we start with the one in the trees over there.
 Sorry, but-
 You can't leave them to their fate!
 Rincewind looked surprised. I can't? he said.
 No. You can't. Look, I'll be frank. I've worked with better material than you, but it's either that
or–have you ever spent a million years in a coal measure?
 Look,I–
 So if you don't stop arguing I'll chop your head off.
 Rincewind saw his own arm snap up until the shimmering blade was humming a mere inch from his
throat. He tried to force his fingers to let go. They wouldn't.
 I don't know how to be a hero! he shouted.
 I propose to teach you.

 Bronze Psepha rumbled deep in his throat.
 K!sdra the dragonrider leaned forward and squinted across the clearing. I see him, he said. He swung
himself down easily from branch to branch and landed lightly on the tussocky grass, drawing his sword.
He took a long look at the approaching man, who was obviously not keen on leaving the shelter of the
trees. He was armed, but the dragonrider observed with some interest the strange way in which the man
held the sword in front of him at arm's length, as though embarrassed to be seen in its company.
 K!sdra hefted his own sword and grinned expansively as the wizard shuffled towards him. Then he leapt.
 Later, he remembered only two things about the fight. He recalled the uncanny way in which the wizard's
sword curved up and caught his own blade with a shock that jerked it out of his grip. The other thing -
and it was this, he averred, that led to his downfall - was that the wizard was covering his eyes with one
hand.
 K!sdra jumped back to avoid another thrust and fell full length on the turf. With a snarl Psepha unfolded
his great wings and launched himself from his tree.
 A moment later the wizard was standing over him, shouting, Tell it that if it singes me I'll let the sword
go. I will. I'll let it go! So tell it!
 The tip of the black sword was hovering over K!sdra's throat, What was odd was that the wizard was
obviously struggling with it, and it appeared to be singing to itself.
 Psepha! K!sdra shouted.
 The dragon roared in defiance, but pulled out of the dive that would have removed Rincewind's head,
and flapped ponderously back to the tree.
 Talk! screamed Rincewind.
 K!sdra squinted at him up the length of the sword.
 What would you like me to say? he asked.
 What?
 I said what would you like me to say?
 Where are my friends? The barbarian and the little man is what I mean.
 I expect they have been taken back to the Wyrmberg.
 Rincewind tugged desperately against the surge of the sword, trying to shut his mind to Kring's
bloodthirsty humming.
 The Wyrmberg. There is only one. It is Dragonhome.
 And I suppose you were waiting to take me there, eh?
 K!sdra gulped involuntarily as the tip of the sword pricked a bead of blood from his adam's apple.
 Don't want people to know you've got dragons here, eh? snarled Rincewind.
 The dragonrider forgot himself enough to nod, and came within a quarter-inch of cutting his own throat.
 Rincewind looked around desperately, and realized that this was something he was really going to have
to go through with.
 Right then, he said as diffidently as he could manage. You'd better take me to this Wyrmberg of
yours, hadn't you?
 I was supposed to take you in dead, muttered K!sdra sullenly.
 Rincewind looked down at him and grinned slowly. It was a wide, manic and utterly humourless rictus
that was the sort of grin that is normally accompanied by small riverside birds wandering in and out
picking scraps out of the teeth.
 Alive will do, said Rincewind. If we're talking about anyone being dead, remember whose sword is in
which hand.
 If you kill me, nothing will prevent Psepha killing you, shouted the prone dragonrider.
 So what I'll do is, I'll chop bits off, agreed the wizard. He tried the effect of the grin again.
 Oh, all right, said K!sdra sulkily. Do you think I've got an imagination?
 He wriggled out from under the sword and waved at the dragon, which took wing again and glided in
towards them. Rincewind swallowed.
 You mean we've got to go on that? he said. K!sdra looked at him scornfully, the point of Kring still
aimed at his neck.
 How else would anyone get to the Wyrmberg?
 I don't know, said Rincewind. How else?
 I mean, there is no other way. It's flying or nothing.
 Rincewind looked again at the dragon before him. He could quite clearly see through it to the crushed
grass on which it lay but, when he gingerly touched a scale that was a mere golden sheen on thin air, it felt
solid enough. Either dragons should exist completely or fail to exist at all, he felt. A dragon only
half-existing was worse than the extremes.
 I didn't know dragons could be seen through, he said.
 K!sdra shrugged. Didn't you? he said.
 He swung himself astride the dragon awkwardly because Rincewind was hanging on to his belt. Once
uncomfortably aboard the wizard moved his white-knuckle grip to a convenient piece of harness and
prodded K!sdra lightly with the sword.
 Have you ever flown before? said the dragonrider, without looking round.
 Not as such, no.
 Would you like something to suck?
 Rincewind gazed at the back of the man's head, then dropped to the bag of red and yellow sweets that
was being proffered.
 Is it necessary? he asked.
 It is traditional, said K!sdra. Please yourself.
 The dragon stood up, lumbered heavily across the meadow, and fluttered into the air.
 Rincewind occasionally had nightmares about teetering on some intangible but enormously high place,
and seeing a blue-distanced, cloud-punctuated landscape reeling away below him (this usually woke him
up with his ankles sweating; he would have been even more worried had he known that the nightmare
was not, as he thought, just the usual discworld vertigo. It was a backwards memory of an event in his
future so terrifying that it had generated harmonics of fear all the way along his lifeline).
 This was not that event, but it was good practise for it. Psepha clawed its way into the air with a series
of vertebrae-shattering bounds. At the top of its last leap the wide wings unfolded with a snap and spread
out with a thump which shook the trees. Then the ground was gone, dropping away in a series of gentle
jerks. Psepha was suddenly rising gracefully, the afternoon sunlight gleaming off wings that were still no
more than a golden film. Rincewind made the mistake of glancing downwards, and found himself looking
through the dragon to the treetops below. Far below. His stomach shrank at the sight.
 Closing his eyes wasn't much better, because it gave his imagination full rein. He compromised by gazing
fixedly into the middle distance, where moorland and forest drifted by and could be contemplated almost
casually.
 Wind Snatched at him. K!sdra half turned and shouted into his ear.
 Behold the Wyrmberg!
 Rincewind turned his head slowly, taking care to keep Kring resting lightly on the dragon's back. His
streaming eyes saw the impossibly inverted mountain rearing out of the deep forested valley like a
trumpet in a tub of nose. Even at this distance he could make out the faint octarine glow in the air that
must be indicating a stable magic aura of at least - he gasped - several milliPrime? At least!
 Oh no, he said.
 Even looking at the ground was better than that. He averted his eyes quickly, and realized that he could
now no longer see the ground through the dragon. As they glided around in a wide circle towards the
Wyrmberg it was definitely taking on a more solid form, as if the creature's body was filling with a gold
mist. By the time the Wyrmberg was in front of them, swinging wildly across the sky, the dragon was as
real as a rock.
 Rincewind thought he could see a faint streak in the air, as if something from the mountain had reached
out and touched the beast. He got the strange feeling that the dragon was being made more genuine.
 Ahead of it the Wyrmberg turned from a distant toy to several billion tons of rock poised between
heaven and earth. He could see small fields, woods and a lake up there, and from the lake a river spilled
out and over the edge
 He made the mistake of following the thread of foaming water with his eyes, and jerked himself back just
in time.
 The flared plateau of the upturned mountain drifted towards them. The dragon didn't even slow. As the
mountain loomed over Rincewind like the biggest fly-swatter in the universe he saw a cave mouth.
Psepha skimmed towards it, shoulder muscles pumping.
 The wizard screamed as the dark spread and enfolded him. There was a brief vision of rock flashing
past, blurred by speed. Then the dragon was in the open again.
 It was inside a cave, but bigger than any cave had a right to be. The dragon, gliding across its vast
emptiness, was a mere gilded fly in a banqueting hall.
 There were other dragons – gold, silver, black, white – flapping across the sun-shafted air on errands of
their own or perched on outcrops of rock. High in the domed roof of the cavern scores of others hung
from huge rings, their wings wrapped bat-like around their bodies. There were men up there, too.
Rincewind swallowed hard when he saw them, because they were walking on that broad expanse of
ceiling like flies.
 Then he made out the thousands of tiny rings that studded the ceiling. A number of inverted men were
watching Psepha's flight with interest. Rincewind swallowed again. For the life of him he couldn't think of
what to do next.
 Well? he asked, in a whisper. Any suggestions?
 Obviously you attack, said Kring scornfully.
 Why didn't I think of that? said Rincewind
 Could it be because they all have crossbows?
 You're a defeatist.
 Defeatist? That's because I'm going to be defeated!
 You're your own worst enemy, Rincewind, said the sword.
 Rincewind looked up at grinning men.
 Bet? he said wearily.
 Before Kring could reply Psepha reared in midair and alighted on one of the large rings, which rocked
alarmingly.
 Would you like to die now, or surrender first? asked K!sdra calmly.
 Men were converging on the ring from all directions, walking with a swaying motion as their hooked
boots engaged the ceiling rings. There were more boots on a rack that hung in a small platform built on
the side of the perch-ring. Before Rincewind could stop him the dragonrider had leapt from the creature's
back to land on the platform, where he stood grinning at the wizard's discomfiture.
 There was a small expressive sound made by a number of crossbows being cocked. Rincewind looked
up at a number of impassive, upside down faces. The dragonfolk's taste in clothing didn't run to anything
much more imaginative than a leather harness, studded with bronze ornaments. Knives and sword
sheaths were worn inverted. Those who were not wearing helmets let their hair flow freely, so that it
moved like seaweed in the ventilation breeze near the roof. There were several women among them. The
inversion did strange things to their anatomy. Rincewind stared.
 Surrender, said K!sdra again.
 Rincewind opened his mouth to do so. Kring hummed a warning, and agonising waves of pain shot up
his arm. Never, he squeaked. The pain stopped.
 Of course he won't! boomed an expansive voice behind him. He's a hero, isn't he?
 Rincewind turned and looked into a pair of hairy nostrils. They belonged to a heavily built young man,
hanging nonchalantly from the ceiling by his boots.
 What is your name, hero? said the man. so that we know who you were.
 Agony shot up Rincewind's arm. I-I'm Rincewind of Ankh, he managed to gasp.
 And I am Lio!rt Dragonlord, said the hanging man, pronouncing the word with the harsh click in the
back of the throat that Rincewind could only think of as a kind of integral punctuation. You have come
to challenge me in mortal combat.
 Well, no, I didn't-
 You are mistaken. K!sdra, help our hero into a pair of hookboots. I am sure he is anxious to get
started.
 No, look, I just came here to find my friends. I'm sure there's no- Rincewind began, as the dragonrider
guided him firmly onto the platform, pushed him onto a seat, and proceeded to strap hookboots to his
feet.
 Hurry up, K!sdra. We mustn't keep our hero from his destiny, said Lio!rt.
 Look, I expect my friends are happy enough here, so if you could just, you know, set me down
somewhere
 You will see your friends soon enough, said the dragonlord airily. If you are religious, I mean. None
who enter the Wyrmberg ever leave again. Except metaphorically, of course. Show him how to reach the
rings, K!sdra.
 Look what you've got me into! Rincewind hissed.
 Kring vibrated in his hand. Remember that I am a magic sword, it hummed.
 How can I forget?
 Climb the ladder and grab a ring, said the dragonrider, then bring your feet up until the hooks catch.
He helped the protesting wizard climb until he was hanging upside down, robe tucked into his britches,
Kring dangling from one hand. At this angle the dragonfolk looked reasonably bearable but the dragons
themselves, hanging from their perches, loomed over the scene like immense gargoyles. Their eyes
glowed with interest.
 Attention, please, said Lio!rt. A dragonrider handed him a long shape, wrapped in red silk.
 We fight to the death, he said. Yours.
 And I suppose I earn my freedom if I win? said Rincewind, without much hope.
 Lio!rt indicated the assembled dragonriders with a tilt of his head.
 Don't be naive, he said.
 Rincewind took a deep breath I suppose I should warn you, he said, his voice hardly quavering at all,
that this is a magic sword.
 Lio!rt let the red silk wrapping drop away into the gloom and flourished a jet-black blade. Runes glowed
on its surface.
 What a coincidence, he said, and lunged.
 Rincewind went rigid with fright, but his arm swung out as Kring shot forward. The swords met in an
explosion of octarine light.
 Lio!rt swung himself backwards, his eyes narrowing. Kring leapt past his guard and, although the
dragonlord's sword jerked up to deflect most of the force, the result was a thin red line across its
master's torso.
 With a growl he launched himself at the wizard boots clattering as he slid from ring to ring. The swords
met again in another violent discharge of magic and, at the same time, Lio!rt brought his other hand down
against Rincewind's head, jarring him so hard that one foot jerked out of its ring and flailed desperately.
 Rincewind knew himself to be almost certainly the worst wizard on the Discworld since he knew but one
spell; yet for all that he was still a wizard, and thus by the inexorable laws of magic this meant that upon
his demise it would be Death himself who appeared to claim him (instead of sending one of his numerous
servants, as is usually the case). Thus it was that, as a grinning Lio!rt swung back and brought his sword
around in a lazy arc, time ran into treacle.
 To Rincewind's eyes the world was suddenly lit by a flickering octarine light, tinged with violet as
photons impacted on the sudden magical aura. Inside it the dragonlord was a ghastly-hued statue, his
sword moving at a snail's pace in the glow.
 Beside Lio!rt was another figure, visible only to those who can see into the extra four dimensions of
magic. It was tall and dark and thin and, against a sudden night of frosty stars, it swung a two-handed
scythe of proverbial sharpness
 Rincewind ducked. The blade hissed coldly through the air beside his head and entered the rock of the
cavern roof without slowing. Death screamed a curse in his cold crypt voice. The scene vanished. What
passed for reality on the Discworld reasserted itself with a rush of sound. Lio!rt gasped at the sudden
turn of speed with which the wizard had dodged his killing stroke and, with that desperation only
available to the really terrified, Rincewind uncoiled like a snake and launched himself across the space
between them. He locked both hands around the dragonlord's sword arm, and wrenched.
 It was at that moment that Rincewind's one remaining ring, already overburdened, slid out of the rock
with a nasty little metal sound.
 He plunged down, swung wildly, and ended up dangling over a bone-splintering death with his hands
gripping the dragonlord's arm so tightly that the man screamed.
 Lio!rt looked up at his feet. Small flakes of rock were dropping out of the roof around the ring pitons.
 Let go, damn you. he screamed. Or we'll both die!
 Rincewind said nothing. He was concentrating on maintaining his grip and keeping his mind closed to the
pressing images of his fate on the rocks below.
 Shoot him! bellowed Lio!rt.
 Out of the corner of his eye Rincewind saw several crossbows levelled at him. Lio!rt chose that moment
to flail down with his free hand, and a fistful of rings stabbed into the wizard's fingers.
 He let go.

 Twoflower grabbed the bars and pulled himself up.
 See anything? said Hrun, from the region of his feet.
 Just clouds.
 Hrun lifted him down again, and sat on the edge of one of the wooden beds that were the only
furnishings in the cell. Bloody hell, he said.
 Don't despair, said Twoflower.
 I'm not despairing.
 I expect it's all some sort of misunderstanding. I expect they'll release us soon. They seem very
civilised.
 Hrun stared at him from under bushy eyebrows. He started to say something, then appeared to think
better of it. He sighed instead.
 And when we get back we can say we've seen dragons, Twoflower continued. What about that, eh?
 Dragons don't exist, said Hrun flatly. Codice of Chimeria killed the last one two hundred years ago. I
don't know what we're seeing, but they aren't dragons.
 But they carried us up in the air! In that hall there must have been hundreds-
 I expect it was just magic, said Hrun, dismissively.
 Well, they looked like dragons, said Twoflower, an air of defiance about him. I always wanted to see
dragons, ever since I was a little lad. Dragons flying around in the sky, breathing flames
 They just used to crawl around in swamps and stuff, and all they breathed was stink, said Hrun lying
down in the bunk. They weren't very big either. They used to collect firewood.
 I heard they used to collect treasure, said Twoflower.
 And firewood. Hey, Hrun added, brightening did you notice all those rooms they brought us through?
Pretty impressive, I thought. Lot of good stuff about, plus some of those tapestries have got to be worth
a fortune. He scratched his chin thoughtfully, making a noise like a porcupine shouldering its way through
gorse.
 What happens next? asked Twoflower.
 Hrun screwed a finger in his ear and inspected it absently. Oh, he said, I expect in a minute the door
will be flung back and I'll be dragged off to some sort of temple arena where I'll fight maybe a couple of
giant spiders and an eight-foot slave from the jungles of Klatch and then I'll rescue some kind of a
princess from the altar and then kill off a few guards or whatever and then this girl will show me the secret
passage out of the place and we'll liberate a couple of horses and escape with the treasure. Hrun leaned
his head back on his hands and looked at the ceiling, whistling tunelessly.
 All that? said Twoflower.
 Usually.
 Twoflower sat down on his bunk and tried to think. This proved difficult, because his mind was awash
with dragons.
 Dragons!
 Ever since he was two years old he had been captivated by the pictures of the fiery beasts in The
Octarine Fairy Book. His sister had told him they didn't really exist, and he recalled the bitter
disappointment. If the world didn't contain those beautiful creatures, he'd decided, it wasn't half the world
it ought to be. And then later he had been bound apprentice to Ninereeds the Masteraccount, who in his
grey-mindedness was everything that dragons were not, and there was no time for dreaming.
 But there was something wrong with these dragons. They were too small and sleek, compared to the
ones in his mind's eye. Dragons ought to be big and green and clawed and exotic and firebreathing - big
and green with long sharp Something moved at the edge of his vision, in the furthest, darkest corner of
the dungeon. When he turned his head it vanished, although he thought he heard the faintest of noises that
might have been made by claws scrabbling on stone.
 Hrun? he said.
 There was a snore from the other bunk.
 Twoflower padded over to the corner, peering gingerly at the stones in case there was a secret panel. At
that moment the door was flung back thumping against the wall. Half a dozen guards hurtled through it,
spread out and flung them selves down on one knee. Their weapons were aimed exclusively at Hrun.
When he thought about this later, Twoflower felt quite offended.
 Hrun snored.
 A woman strode into the room. Not many women can stride convincingly, but she managed it. She
glanced briefly at Twoflower, as one might look at a piece of furniture, then glared down at the man on
the bed.
 She was wearing the same sort of leather harness that the dragonriders had been wearing but in her case
it was much briefer. That, and the magnificent mane of chestnut-red hair that fell to her waist, was her
only concession to what even on the Discworld passed for decency. She was also wearing a thoughtful
expression.
 Hrun made a glubbing noise, turned over, and slept on.
 With a careful movement, as though handling some instrument of rare delicacy, the woman drew a slim
black dagger from her belt and stabbed downward.
 Before it was halfway through its arc Hrun's right hand moved so fast that it appeared to travel between
two points in space without at any time occupying the intervening air. It closed around the woman's wrist
with a dull smack. His other hand groped feverishly for a sword that wasn't there Hrun awoke.
 Gngh? he said, looking up at the woman with a puzzled frown. Then he caught sight of the bowmen.
 Let go, said the woman, in a voice that was calm and quiet and edged with diamonds. Hrun released
his grip slowly.
 She stepped back, massaging her wrist and looking at Hrun in much the same way that a cat watches a
mousehole.
 So, she said at last. You pass the first test. What is your name, barbarian?
 Who are you calling a barbarian? snarled Hrun.
 That is what I want to know.
 Hrun counted the bowmen slowly and made a brief calculation. His shoulders relaxed.
 I am Hrun of Chimeria. And you?
 Liessa Dragonlady.
 You are the lord of this place?
 That remains to be seen. You have the look about you of a hired sword, Hrun of Chimeria. I could use
you - if you pass the tests, of course. There are three of them. You have passed the first.
 What are the other- Hrun paused, his lips moved soundlessly and then he hazarded, two?
 Perilous.
 And the fee?
 Valuable.
 Excuse me, said Twoflower
 And if I fail these tests? said Hrun, ignoring him. The air between Hrun and Liessa crackled with small
explosions of charisma as their gazes sought for a hold.
 If you had failed the first test you would now be dead. This may be considered a typical penalty.
 Um, look, began Twoflower. Liessa spared him a brief glance, and appeared actually to notice him for
the first time.
 Take that away, she said calmly, and turned back to Hrun. Two of the guards shouldered their bows,
grasped Twoflower by the elbows and lifted him off the ground. Then they trotted smartly through the
doorway.
 Hey, said Twoflower, as they hurried down the corridor outside, where (as they stopped in front of
another door) is my (as they dragged the door open) Luggage? He landed in a heap of what might
once have been straw. The door banged shut, its echoes punctuated by the sound of bolts being slammed
home.
 In the other cell Hrun had barely blinked.
 Okay, he said, what is the second test?
 You must kill my two brothers. Hrun considered this.
 Both at the same time, or one after the other? he said.
 Consecutively or concurrently, she assured him
 What?
 Just kill them, she said sharply
 Good fighters, are they?
 Renowned.
 So in return for all this?
 You will wed me and become Lord of the Wyrmberg.
 There was a long pause. Hrun's eyebrows twisted themselves in unaccustomed calculation.
 I get you and this mountain? he said at last.
 Yes. She looked him squarely in the eye, and her lips twitched. The fee is worthwhile, I assure you.
 Hrun dropped his gaze to the rings on her hand The stones were large, being the incredibly rare blue
milk diamonds from the clay basins of Mithos. When he managed to turn his eyes from them he saw
Liessa glaring down at him in fury.
 So calculating? she rasped. Hrun the Barbarian who would boldly walk into the jaws of Death
Himself?
 Hrun shrugged. Sure, he said, the only reason for walking into the jaws of Death is so's you can steal
His gold teeth. He brought one arm around expansively, and the wooden bunk was at the end of it. It
cannoned into the bowmen and Hrun followed it joyously, felling one man with a blow and snatching the
weapon from another. A moment later it was all over.
 Liessa had not moved.
 Well? she said.
 Well what? said Hrun, from the carnage
 Do you intend to kill me?
 What? Oh no. No, this is just, you know, kind of a habit. Just keeping in practice. So where are these
brothers? He grinned.

 Twoflower sat on his straw and stared into the darkness. He wondered how long he had been there.
Hours, at least. Days, probably. He speculated that perhaps it had been years, and he had simply
forgotten.
 No, that sort of thinking wouldn't do. He tried to think of something else - grass, trees, fresh air,
dragons. Dragons
 There was the faintest of scrabblings in the darkness. Twoflower felt the sweat prickle on his forehead.
 Something was in the cell with him. Something that made small noises, but even in the pitch blackness
gave the impression of hugeness. He felt the air move.
 When he lifted his arm there was the greasy feel and faint shower of sparks that betokened a localised
magical field. Twoflower found himself fervently wishing for light.
 A gout of flame rolled past his head and struck the far wall. As the rocks flashed into furnace heat he
looked up at the dragon that now occupied more than half the cell.
 I obey, lordsaid a voice in his head.
 By the glow of the crackling, spitting stone Twoflower looked into his own reflection in two enormous
green eyes. Beyond them the dragon was as multi-hued, horned, spiked and lithe as the one in his
memory - a real dragon. Its folded wings were nevertheless still wide enough to scrape the wall on both
sides of the room. It lay with him between its talons.
 Obey? he said, his voice vibrating with terror and delight.
 Of course, lord.
 The glow faded away. Twoflower pointed a trembling finger at where he remembered the door to be
and said, Open it!
 The dragon raised its huge head. Again the ball of flame rolled out but this time, as the dragon's neck
muscles contracted, its colour faded from orange to yellow, from yellow to white, and finally to the
faintest of blues. By that time the flame was also very thin, and where it touched the wall the molten rock
spat and ran. When it reached the door the metal exploded into a shower of hot droplets.
 Black shadows arced and jiggered over the walls. The metal bubbled for an eye-aching moment, and
then the door fell in two pieces in the passage beyond. The flame winked out with a suddenness that was
almost as startling as its arrival.
 Twoflower stepped gingerly over the cooling door and looked up and down the corridor. It was empty.
 The dragon followed. The heavy door frame caused it some minor difficulty, which it overcame with a
swing of its shoulders that tore the timber out and tossed it to one side. The creature looked expectantly
at Twoflower, its skin rippling and twitching as it sought to open its wings in the confines of the passage.
 How did you get in there? said Twoflower.
 You summoned me, master.
 I don't remember doing that.
 In your mind. You called me up, in, your mindthought the dragon, patiently.
 You mean I just thought of you and there You were?
 Yes.
 It was magic?
 Yes.
 But I've thought about dragons all my life.
 In this place the frontier between thought and reality is probably a little confused. All I know is that once
I was not, and then you thought of me, and then I was. Therefore, of course, I am yours to command.
 Good grief
 Half a dozen guards chose that moment to turn the bend in the corridor. They stopped, openmouthed.
Then one remembered himself sufficiently to raise his crossbow and fire.
 The dragon's chest heaved. The quarrel exploded into flaming fragments in mid-air. The guards scurried
out of sight. A fraction of a second later a wash of flame played over the stones where they had been
standing.
 Twoflower looked up in admiration
 Can you fly too? he said.
 Of course.
 Twoflower glanced up and down the corridor, and decided against following the guards. Since he knew
himself to be totally lost already, any direction was probably an improvement. He edged past the dragon
and hurried away, the huge beast turning with difficulty to follow him.
 They padded down a series of passages that crisscrossed like a maze. At one point Twoflower thought
he heard shouts, a long way behind them but they soon faded away. Sometimes the dark arch of a
crumbling doorway loomed past them in the gloom. Light filtered through dimly from various shafts and,
here and there, bounced off big mirrors that had been mortared into angles of the passage. Sometimes
there was a brighter glow from a distant light-well.
 What was odd, thought Twoflower as he strolled down a wide flight of stairs and kicked up billowing
clouds of silver dust motes, was that the tunnels here were much wider. And better constructed, too.
There were statues in niches set in the walls, and here and there faded but interesting tapestries had been
hung. They mainly showed dragons - dragons by the hundreds in flight or hanging from their perch rings,
dragons with men on their backs hunting down deer and, sometimes other men. Twoflower touched one
tapestry gingerly. The fabric crumbled instantly in the hot dry air, leaving only a dangling mesh where
some threads had been plaited with fine gold wire.
 I wonder why they left all this? he said.
 I don't knowsaid a polite voice in his head.
 He turned and looked up into the scaley horse face above him.
 What is your name, dragon? said Twoflower.
 I don't know.
 I think I shall call you Ninereeds.
 That is my name, then.
 They waded through the all-encroaching dust in a series of huge, dark-pillared halls which had been
delved out of the solid rock. With some cunning too, from floor to ceiling the walls were a mass of
statues, gargoyles, bas-reliefs and fluted columns that cast weirdly-moving shadows when the dragon
gave an obliging illumination at Twoflower's request. They crossed the lengthy galleries and vast carven
amphitheatres, all awash with deep soft dust and completely uninhabited. No-one had come to these
dead caverns in centuries.
 Then he saw the path, leading away into yet another dark tunnel mouth. Someone had been using it
regularly, and recently. It was a deep narrow trail in the grey blanket.
 Twoflower followed it. It led through still more lofty halls and winding corridors quite big enough for a
dragon (and dragons had come this way once, it seemed; there was a room full of rotting harness,
dragon-sized, and another room containing plate and chain mail big enough for elephants). They ended in
a pair of green bronze doors, each so high that they disappeared into the gloom. In front of Twoflower,
at chest height, was a small handle shaped like a brass dragon.
 When he touched it the doors swung open instantly and with a disconcerting noiselessness.
 Instantly sparks crackled in Twoflower's hair and there was a sudden gust of hot dry wind that didn't
disturb the dust in the way that ordinary wind should but, instead, whipped it up momentarily into
unpleasantly half-living shapes before it settled again. In Twoflower's ears came the strange shrill
twittering of the Things locked in the distant dungeon Dimensions, out beyond the fragile lattice of time
and space. Shadows appeared where there was nothing to cause them. The air buzzed like a hive.
 In short, there was a vast discharge of magic going on around him.
 The chamber beyond the door was lit by a pale green glow. Stacked around the walls, each on its own
marble shelf, were tier upon tier of coffins. In the centre of the room was a stone chair on a raised dais,
and it contained a slumped figure which did not move but said, in a brittle old voice, Come in, young
man.
 Twoflower stepped forward. The figure in the seat was human, as far as he could make out in the murky
light, but there was something about the awkward way it was sprawled in the chair that made him glad he
couldn't see it any clearer.
 I'm dead, you know, came a voice from what Twoflower fervently hoped was a head, in
conversational tones. I expect you can tell.
 Um, said Twoflower. Yes. He began to back away.
 Obvious, isn't it? agreed the voice. You'd be Twoflower, wouldn't you? Or is that later?
 Later? said Twoflower. Later than what? He stopped.
 Well, said the voice. You see, one of the disadvantages of being dead is that one is released as it were
from the bonds of time and therefore I can see everything that has happened or will happen, all at the
same time except that of course I now know that Time does not, for all practical purposes, exist.
 That doesn't sound like a disadvantage, said Twoflower.
 You don't think so? Imagine every moment being at one and the same time a distant memory and a
nasty surprise and you'll see what I mean. Anyway, I now recall what it was I am about to tell you. Or
have I already done so? That's a fine looking dragon, by the way. Or don't I say that, yet?
 It is rather good. It just turned up, said Twoflower.
 It turned up? said the voice. You summoned it!
 Yes, well, all I did-
 You have the Power! 
 All I did was think of it.
 That's what the Power is. Have I already told you that I am Greicha the First? Or is that next? I'm
sorry, but I haven't had too much experience of transcendence. Anyway, yes - the Power. It summons
dragons, you know.
 I think you already told me that, said Twoflower.
 Did I? I certainly intended to, said the dead man.
 But how does it? I've been thinking about dragons all my life, but this is the first time one has turned up.
 Oh well, you see, the truth of the matter is that dragons have never existed as you (and, until I was
poisoned some three months ago,) I understand existence. I'm talking about the true dragon, draconis
nobilis, you understand; the swamp dragon, draconis vulgaris, is a base creature and not worth our
consideration. The true dragon, on the other hand, is a creature of such refinement of spirit that they can
only take on form in this world if they are conceived by the most skilled imagination. And even then the
said imagination must be in some place heavily impregnated with magic which helps to weaken the walls
between the world of the seen and unseen. Then the dragons pop through, as it were, and impress their
form on this world's possibility matrix. I was very good at it when I was alive. I could imagine up to, oh,
five hundred dragons at a time. Now Liessa, the most skilled of my children, can barely imagine fifty
rather nondescript creatures. So much for a progressive education. She doesn't really believe in them.
That's why her dragons are rather boring while yours, said the voice of Greicha, is almost as good as
some of mine used to be. A sight for sore eyes, not that I have any to speak of now.
 Twoflower said hurriedly, You keep saying you're dead
 Well?
 Well, the dead, er, they, you know, don't talk much. As a rule.
 I used to be an exceptionally powerful wizard. My daughter poisoned me, of course. It is the generally
accepted method of succession in our family, but, the corpse sighed, or at least a sigh came from the air
a few feet above it, it soon became obvious that none of my three children is sufficiently powerful to
wrest the lordship of the Wyrmberg from the other two. A most unsatisfactory arrangement. A kingdom
like ours has to have one ruler. So I resolved to remain alive in an unofficial capacity, which of course
annoys them all immensely. I won't give my children the satisfaction of burying me until there is only one
of them left to perform the ceremony. There was a nasty wheezing noise. Twoflower decided that it was
meant to be a chuckle.
 So it was one of them that kidnapped us? said Twoflower.
 Liessa, said the dead wizard's voice. My daughter. Her power is strongest, you know. My sons'
dragons are incapable of flying more than a few miles before they fade.
 Fade? I did notice that we could see through the one that brought us here, said Twoflower. I thought
that was a bit odd.
 Of course, said Greicha. The Power only works near the Wyrmberg. It's the inverse square law you
know. At least, I think it is. As the dragons fly further away they begin to dwindle. Otherwise my little
Liessa would be ruling the whole world by now, if I know anything about it. But I can see I mustn't keep
you. I expect you'll be wanting to rescue your friend.
 Twoflower gaped. Hrun? he said.
 Not him. The skinny wizard. My son Lio!rt is trying to hack him to pieces. I admired the way you
rescued him. Will, I mean.
 Twoflower drew himself up to his full height, an easy task. Where is he? he said, heading towards the
door with what he hoped was an heroic stride.
 Just follow the pathway in the dust, said the voice. Liessa comes to see me sometimes. She still comes
to see her old dad, my little girl. She was the only one with the strength of character to murder me. A
chip off the old block. Good luck, by the way. I seem to recall I said that. Will say it now, I mean.
 The rambling voice got lost in a maze of tenses as Twoflower ran along the dead tunnels, with the dragon
loping along easily behind him. But soon he was leaning against a pillar, completely out of breath. It
seemed ages since he'd had anything to eat.
 Why don't you fly? said Ninereeds, inside his head. The dragon spread its wings and gave an
experimental flap, which lifted it momentarily off the ground. Twoflower stared for a moment, then ran
forward and clambered quickly on to the beast's neck. Soon they were airborne, the dragon skimming
along easily a few feet from the floor and leaving a billowing cloud of dust in its wake.
 Twoflower hung on as best he could as Ninereeds swooped through a succession of caverns and soared
around a spiral staircase that could easily have accommodated a retreating army. At the top they
emerged into the more inhabited regions, the mirrors at every corridor corner brightly polished and
reflecting a pale light.
 I smell other dragons.
 The wings became a blur and Twoflower was jerked back as the dragon veered and sped off down a
side corridor like a gnat-crazed swallow. Another sharp turn sent them soaring out of a tunnel mouth in
the side of a vast cavern. There were rocks far below, and up above were broad shafts of light from
great holes near the roof. A lot of activity on the ceiling, too as Ninereeds hovered, thumping the air
with his wings, Twoflower peered up at the shapes of roosting beasts and tiny men-shaped dots that
were somehow walking upside down.
 This is a roosting hall, said the dragon in a satisfied tone.
 As Twoflower watched, one of the shapes far above detached itself from the roof and began to grow
larger

 Rincewind watched as Lio!rt's pale face dropped away from him. This is funny, gibbered a small part of
his mind, why am I rising?
 Then he began to tumble in the air and reality took over. He was dropping to the distant,
guano-speckled rocks.
 His brain reeled with the thought. The words of the Spell picked just that moment to surface from the
depths of his mind, as they always did in time of crisis. Why not say us, they seemed to urge. What have
you got to lose?
 Rincewind waved a hand in the gathering slipstream.
 Ashonai, he called. The word formed in front of him in a cold blue flame that streamed in the wind.
 He waved the other hand, drunk with terror and magic.
 Ebiris, he intoned. The sound froze into a flickering orange word that hung beside its companion.
 Urshoring. Kvanti. Pythan. N'gurad. Feringomalee. As the words blazed their rainbow colours around
him he flung his hands back and prepared to say the eighth and final word that would appear in
corruscating octarine and seal the spell. The imminent rocks were forgotten.
 – he began.
 The breath was knocked out of him, the spell scattered and snuffed out. A pair of arms locked around
his waist and the whole world jerked sideways as the dragon rose out of its long dive claws grazing just
for a moment the topmost rock on the Wyrmberg's noisome floor. Twoflower laughed triumphantly.
 Got him!
 And the dragon, curving gracefully at the top of his flight, gave a lazy flip of his wings and soared through
a cavemouth into the morning air.

 At noon, in a wide green meadow on the lush tableland that was the top of the impossibly-balanced
Wyrmberg, the dragons and their riders formed a wide circle. There was room beyond them for a rabble
of servants and slaves and others who scratched a living here on the roof of the world, and they were all
watching the figures clustered in the centre of the grassy arena.
 The group contained a number of senior dragon lords, and among them were Lio!rt and his brother
Liartes. The former was still rubbing his legs, with Small grimaces of pain. Slightly to one side stood
Liessa and Hrun, with some of the woman's own followers. Between the two factions stood the
Wyrmberg's hereditary Loremaster.
 As you know, he said uncertainly, the not-fully-late Lord of the Wyrmberg, Greicha the First, has
stipulated that there will be no succession until one of his children feels himself - or as it might be, herself -
powerful enough to challenge and defeat his or her siblings in mortal combat.
 Yes, yes, we know all that. Get on with it, said a thin peevish voice from the air beside him.
 The loremaster swallowed. He had never come to terms with his former master's failure to expire
properly. Is the old buzzard dead or isn't he? he wondered.
 It is not certain, he quavered, whether it is allowable to issue a challenge by proxy–
 It is, it is, snapped Greicha's disembodied voice. It shows intelligence. Don't take all day about it.
 I challenge you, said Hrun, glaring at the brothers, both at once.
 Lio!rt and Liartes exchanged looks.
 You'll fight us both together? said Liartes, a tall, wiry man with long black hair.
 Yah.
 That's pretty uneven odds, isn't it?
 Yah. I outnumber you one to two.
 Lio!rt scowled. You arrogant barbarian-
 That just about does it, growled Hrun. I'll-
 The Loremaster put out a blue-veined hand to restrain him.
 It is forbidden to fight on the Killing Ground, he said, and paused while he considered the sense of this.
You know what I mean, anyway, he hazarded, giving up, and added As the challenged parties my
lords Lio!rt and Liartes have choice of weapons.
 Dragons, they said together. Liessa snorted.
 Dragons can be used offensively, therefore they are weapons, said Lio!rt firmly. if you disagree we
can fight over it.
 Yah, said his brother, nodding at Hrun.
 The Loremaster felt a ghostly finger prod him in the chest Don't stand there with your mouth open, said
Greicha's graveyard voice. Just hurry up, will you?
 Hrun stepped back, shaking his head.
 Oh no, he said. Once was enough. I'd rather be dead than fight on one of those things.
 Die, then, said the Loremaster, as kindly as he could manage.
 Lio!rt and Liartes were already striding back across the turf to where the servants stood waiting with
their mounts. Hrun turned to Liessa. She shrugged.
 Don't I even get a sword? he pleaded. A knife, even?
 No, she said. I didn't expect this. She suddenly looked smaller, all defiance gone. I'm sorry.
 You're sorry?
 Yes. I'm sorry.
 Yes, I thought you said you're sorry.
 Don't glare at me like that! I can imagine you the finest dragon to ride
 NO!
 The Loremaster wiped his nose on a handkerchief, held the little silken square aloft for a moment, then
let it fall.
 A boom of wings made Hrun spin around.
 Lio!rt's dragon was already airborne and circling around towards them. As it swooped low over the turf
a billow of flame shot from its mouth, scoring a black streak across the grass that rushed towards Hrun.
 At the last minute he pushed Liessa aside, and felt the wild pain of the flame on his arm as he dived for
safety. He rolled as he hit the ground, and flipped on to his feet again while he looked around frantically
for the other dragon. It came in from one side, and Hrun was forced to take a badly-judged standing
jump to escape the flame. The dragon's tail whipped around as it passed and caught him a stinging blow
across the forehead. He pushed himself upright, shaking his head to make the wheeling stars go away.
His blistered back screamed pain at him.
 Lio!rt came in for a second run, but slower this time to allow for the big man's unexpected agility. As the
ground drifted up he saw the barbarian standing stock still, chest heaving, arms hanging loosely by his
sides. An easy target. As his dragon swooped away Lio!rt turned his head, expecting to see a dreadfully
big cinder. There was nothing there. Puzzled, Lio!rt turned back.
 Hrun, heaving himself over the dragon's shoulder scales with one hand and beating out his flaming hair
with the other, presented himself to his view. Lio!rt's hand flew to his dagger, but pain had sharpened
Hrun's normally excellent reflexes to needle point. A backhand blow hammered into the dragonlord's
wrist, sending the dagger arcing away towards the ground, and another caught the man full on the chin.
 The dragon, carrying the weight of two men, was only a few yards above the grass. This turned out to
be fortunate, because at the moment Lio!rt lost consciousness the dragon winked out of existence. Liessa
hurried across the grass and helped Hrun stagger to his feet. He blinked at her.
 What happened? What happened? he said thickly.
 That was really fantastic, she said. The way you turned that somersault in mid-air and everything.
 Yah, but what happened?
 It's rather difficult to explain-
 Hrun peered up at the sky. Liartes, by far the most cautious of the two brothers, was circling high above
them.
 Well, you've got about ten seconds to try, he said The dragons-
 Yah?
 They're imaginary.
 Like all these imaginary burns on my arm, you mean?
 Yes. No! she shook her head violently. I'll have to tell you later!
 Fine, if you can find a really good medium, snapped Hrun. He glared up at Liartes, who was beginning
to descend in wide sweeps.
 Just listen, will you? Unless my brother is conscious his dragon can't exist, it's got no pathway through
to this-
 Run! shouted Hrun. He threw her away from him and flung himself flat on the ground as Liartes' dragon
thundered by, leaving another smoking scar across the turf.
 While the creature sought height for another sweep Hrun scrambled to his feet and set off at a dead run
for the woods at the edge of the arena. They were sparse, little more than a wide and overgrown hedge,
but at least no dragon would be able to fly through them.
 It didn't try. Liartes brought his mount in to land on the turf a few yards away and dismounted casually.
The dragon folded its wings and poked its head in among the greenery, while its master leaned against a
tree and whistled tunelessly.
 I can burn you out, said Liartes, after a while. The bushes remained motionless.
 Perhaps you're in that holly bush over there? The holly bush became a waxy ball of flame.
 I'm sure I can see movement in those ferns.
 The ferns became mere skeletons of white ash.
 You're only prolonging it, barbarian. Why not give in now? I've burned lots of people; it doesn't hurt a
bit, said Liartes, looking sideways at the bushes.
 The dragon continued through the spinney, incinerating every likely-looking bush and clump of ferns.
Liartes drew his sword and waited.
 Hrun dropped from a tree and landed running. Behind him the dragon roared and crashed through the
bushes as it tried to turn around, but Hrun was running, running, with his gaze fixed on Liartes and a dead
branch in his hands.
 It is a little known but true fact that a two legged creature can usually beat a four legged creature over a
short distance, simply because of the time it takes the quadruped to get its legs sorted out. Hrun heard
the scrabble of claws behind him and then an ominous thump. The dragon had half-opened its wings and
was trying to fly.
 As Hrun bore down on the dragonlord Liartes' sword came up wickedly, to be caught on the branch.
Then Hrun cannoned into him and the two men sprawled on the ground.
 The dragon roared.
 Liartes screamed as Hrun brought a knee upwards with anatomical precision, but managed a wild blow
that rebroke the barbarian's nose for him.
 Hrun kicked away and scrambled to his feet, to find himself looking up into the wild horse-face of the
dragon, its nostrils distended.
 He lashed out with a foot and caught Liartes, who was trying to stand up, on the side of his head. The
man slumped.
 The dragon vanished. The ball of fire that was billowing towards Hrun faded until, when it reached him, it
was no more than a puff of warm air. Then there was no sound but the crackle of burning bushes.
 Hrun slung the unconscious dragonlord over his shoulder and set off at a trot back to the arena. Halfway
there he found Lio!rt sprawled on the ground, one leg bent awkwardly. He stooped and, with a grunt,
hoisted the man on to his vacant shoulder.
 Liessa and the Loremaster were waiting on a raised dais at one end of the meadow. The dragonwoman
had quite recovered her composure now, and looked levelly at Hrun as he threw the two men down on
the steps before her. The people around her were standing in deferential poses, like a court.
 Kill them, she said.
 I kill in my own time, he said. In any case, killing unconscious people isn't right.
 I can't think of a more opportune time, said the Loremaster. Liessa snorted.
 Then I shall banish them, she said. Once they are beyond the reach of the Wyrmberg's magic then
they'll have no Power. They'll be simply brigands. Will that satisfy you?
 Yes.
 I am surprised that you are so merciful, Hrun.
 Hrun shrugged. A man in my position, he can't afford to be anything else, he's got to consider his
image. He looked around. Where's the next test, then?
 I warn you that it is perilous. If you wish, you may leave now. If you pass the test, however, you will
become lord of the Wyrmberg and, of course, my lawful husband.
 Hrun met her gaze.He thought about his life, to date. It suddenly seemed to him to have been full of long
damp nights sleeping under the stars, desperate fights with trolls, city guards, countless bandits and evil
priests and, on at least three occasions, actual demigods - and for what? Well, for quite a lot of treasure,
he had to admit - but where had it all gone? Rescuing beleagured maidens had a certain passing reward,
but most of the time he'd finished up by setting them up in some city somewhere with a handsome dowry,
because after a while even the most agreeable exmaiden became possessive and had scant sympathy for
his efforts to rescue her sister sufferers. In short, life had really left him with little more than a reputation
and a network of scars. Being a lord might be fun. Hrun grinned. With a base like this, all these dragons
and a good bunch of fighting men, a man could really be a contender.
 Besides, the wench was not uncomely.
 The third test? she said.
 Am I to be weaponless again? said Hrun.
 Liessa reached up and removed her helmet letting the coils of red hair tumble out. Then she unfastened
the brooch of her robe. Underneath, she was naked.
 As Hrun's gaze swept over her his mind began to operate two notional counting machines. One assessed
the gold in her bangles, the tiger-rubies that ornamented her toe-rings, the diamond spangle that adorned
her navel, and two highly individual whirligigs of silver filigree. The other was plugged straight into his
libido. Both produced tallies that pleased him mightily.
 As she raised a hand and proffered a glass of wine she smiled, and said, I think not.

 
 He didn't attempt to rescue you, Rincewind pointed out as a last resort.
 He clung desperately to Twoflower's waist as the dragon circled slowly, tilting the world at a dangerous
angle. The new knowledge that the scaley back he was astride only existed as a sort of threedimensional
daydream did not, he had soon realised, do anything at all for his ankle-wrenching sensations of vertigo.
His mind kept straying towards the possible results of Twoflower losing his concentration.
 Not even Hrun could have prevailed against those crossbows, said Twoflower stoutly.
 As the dragon rose higher above the patch of woodland, where the three of them had slept a damp and
uneasy sleep, the sun rose over the edge of the disc. Instantly the gloomy blues and greys of pre-dawn
were transformed into a bright bronze river that flowed across the world, flaring into gold where it struck
ice or water or a light-dam. (Owing to the density of the magical field surrounding the disc, light itself
moved at sub-sonic speeds; this interesting property was well utilized by the Sorca people of the Great
Nef, for example, who over the centuries had constructed intricate and delicate dams, and valleys walled
with polished silica, to catch the slow sunlight and sort of store it. The Scintillating reservoirs of the Nef,
overflowing after several weeks of uninterrupted sunlight, were a truly magnificent sight from the air and it
is therefore unfortunate that Twoflower and Rincewind did not happen to glance in that direction.)
 In front of them the billion-ton impossibility that was the magic-wrought Wyrmberg hung against the sky
and that was not too bad, until Rincewind turned his head and saw the mountain's shadow slowly unroll
itself across the cloudscape of the world
 What can you see? said Twoflower to the dragon.
 I see fighting on the top of the mountaincame the gentle reply.
 See? said Twoflower. Hrun's probably fighting for his life at this very moment.
 Rincewind was silent. After a moment Twoflower looked around. The wizard was staring intently at
nothing at all, his lips moving soundlessly.
 Rincewind?
 The wizard made a small croaking noise.
 I'm sorry, said Twoflower. What did you say?
 all the way the great fall muttered Rincewind, His eyes focused, looked puzzled for a moment,
then widened in terror. He made the mistake of looking down.
 Aargh, he opined, and began to slide.
 Twoflower grabbed him.
 What's the matter?
 Rincewind tried shutting his eyes, but there were no eyelids to his imagination and it was staring widely.
 Don't you get scared of heights? he managed to say.
 Twoflower looked down at the tiny landscape, mottled with cloud shadows. The thought of fear hadn't
actually occurred to him.
 No, he said. Why should I? You're just as dead if you fall from forty feet as you are from four
thousand fathoms, that's what I say.
 Rincewind tried to consider this dispassionately, but couldn't see the logic of it. It wasn't the actual
falling, it was the hitting he
 Twoflower grabbed him quickly.
 Steady on, he said cheerfully. We're nearly there.
 I wish I was back in the city, moaned Rincewind. I wish I was back on the ground.
 I wonder if dragons can fly all the way to the stars? mused Twoflower. Now that would be
something
 You're mad, said Rincewind flatly. There was no reply from the tourist, and when the wizard craned
around he was horrified to see Twoflower looking up at the paling stars with an odd smile on his face.
 Don't you even think about it, added Rincewind, menacingly.
 The man you seek is talking to the dragon-womansaid the dragon.
 Hmm? said Twoflower, still looking at the paling stars.
 What? said Rincewind urgently.
 Oh yes. Hrun, said Twoflower. I hope we're in time. Dive now. Go low.
 Rincewind opened his eyes as the wind increased to a whistling gale. Perhaps they were blown open -
the wind certainly made them impossible to shut.
 The flat summit of the Wyrmberg rose up at them, lurched alarmingly, then somersaulted into a green
blur that flashed by on either side. Tiny woods and fields blurred into a rushing patchwork. A brief silvery
flash in the landscape may have been the little river that overflowed into the air at the plateau's rim.
Rincewind tried to force the memory out of his mind , but it was rather enjoying itself there, terrorizing the
other occupants and kicking over the furniture.

 I think not, said Liessa.
 Hrun took the wine cup, slowly. He grinned like a pumpkin.
 Around the arena the dragons started to bay. Their riders looked up. And something like a green blur
flashed across the arena, and Hrun had gone. The winecup hung momentarily in the air, then crashed
down on the steps. Only then did a single drop spill.
 This was because, in the instant of enfolding Hrun gently in his claws, Ninereeds the dragon had
momentarily synchronized their bodily rhythms. Since the dimension of the imagination is much more
complex than those of time and space, which are very junior dimensions indeed, the effect of this was to
instantly transform a stationary and priapic Hrun into a Hrun moving sideways at eighty miles an hour with
no ill-effects whatsoever, except for a few wasted mouthfuls of wine. Another effect was to cause Liessa
to scream with rage and summon her dragon. As the gold beast materialised in front of her she leapt
astride it, still naked, and snatched a crossbow from one of the guards. Then she was airborne, while the
other dragonriders swarmed towards their own beasts.
 The Loremaster, watching from the pillar he had prudently slid behind in the mad scramble happened at
that moment to catch the cross dimensional echoes of a theory being at the same instant hatched in the
mind of an early psychiatrist in an adjacent universe, possibly because the dimension-leak was flowing
both ways, and for a moment the psychiatrist saw the girl on the dragon. The loremaster smiled.
 Want to bet that she won't catch him? said Greicha, in a voice of worms and sepulchres, right by his
ear.
 The loremaster shut his eyes and swallowed hard.
 I thought that my Lord would now be residing fully in the Dread Land, he managed.
 I am a wizard, said Greicha. Death Himself must claim a wizard. And, aha, He doesn't appear to be in
the neighbourhood
 SHAL WE GO? asked Death.
 He was on a white horse, a horse of flesh and blood but red of eye and fiery of nostril, and He stretched
out a bony hand and took Greicha's soul out of the air and rolled it up until it was a point of painful light,
and then He swallowed it.
 Then He clapped spurs to his steed and it sprang into the air, sparks corruscating from its hooves.
 Lord Greicha! whispered the old Loremaster, as the universe flickered around him.
 That was a mean trick, came the wizard's voice, a mere speck of sound disappearing into the infinite
black dimensions.
 My Lord what is Death like? called the old man tremulously.
 When I have investigated it fully, I will let you know, came the faintest of modulations on the breeze.
 Yes, murmured the loremaster. A thought struck him. During daylight, please, he added.

 You clowns, screamed Hrun, from his perch on Ninereed's foreclaws.
 What did he say? roared Rincewind, as the dragon ripped its way through the air in the race for the
heights.
 Didn't hear. bellowed Twoflower, his voice torn away by the gale. As the dragon banked slightly he
looked down at the little toy spinning top that was the mighty Wyrmberg and saw the swarm of creatures
rising in pursuit. Ninereed's wings pounded and flicked the air away contemptuously. Thinner air, too.
Twoflower's ear popped for the third time.
 Ahead of the swarm, he noticed, was a golden dragon. Someone on it, too.
 Hey, are you all right? said Rincewind urgently.
 He had to drink in several lungfuls of the strangely distilled air in order to get the words out.
 I could have been a lord, and you clowns had to go and- Hrun gasped. as the chill thin air drew the life
even out of his mighty chest
 Wass happnin to the air? muttered Rincewind. Blue lights appeared in front of his eyes.
 Unk, said Twoflower, and passed out.
 The dragon vanished.
 For a few seconds the three men continued upwards. Twoflower and the wizard presenting an odd
picture as they sat one in front of the other with their legs astride something that wasn't there, Then what
passed for gravity on the Disc recovered from the surprise, and claimed them.
 At that moment Liessa's dragon flashed by, and Hrun landed heavily across its neck. Liassa leaned over
and kissed him.
 This detail was lost to Rincewind as he dropped away, with his arms still clasped around Twoflower's
waist. The disc was a little round map pinned against the sky. It didn't appear to be moving, but
Rincewind knew that it was. The whole world was coming towards him like a giant custard pie.
 Wake up! he shouted, above the roar of the wind. Dragons! Think of dragons!
 There was a flurry of wings as they plummeted through the host of pursuing creatures, which fell away
and up. Dragons screamed and wheeled across the sky.
 No answer came from Twoflower. Rincewind's robe whipped around him, but he did not wake.
Dragons, thought Rincewind in a panic. He tried to concentrate his mind, tried to envisage a really lifelike
dragon. If he can do it, he thought, then so can I. But nothing happened.
 The disc was bigger now, a cloud-swirled circle rising gently underneath them.
 Rincewind tried again, screwing up his eyes and straining every nerve in his body. A dragon. His
imagination, a somewhat battered and over-used organ, reached out for a dragon any dragon.
 IT WON'T WORK, laughed a voice like the dull tolling of a funereal bell, YOU DON'T BELIEVE IN
THEM.
 Rincewind looked at the terrible mounted apparition grinning at him, and his mind bolted in terror.
 There was a brilliant flash.
 There was utter darkness.
 There was a soft floor under Rincewind's feet, a pink light around him, and the sudden shocked cries of
many people.
 He looked around wildly. He was standing in some kind of tunnel, which was mostly filled with seats in
which outlandishly-dressed people had been strapped. They were all shouting at him.
 Wake up, he hissed. Help me!
 Dragging the still-unconscious tourist with him he backed away from the mob until his free hand found an
oddly-shaped door handle. He twisted it and ducked through, then slammed it hard. He stared around
the new room in which he found himself and met the terrified gaze of a young woman who dropped the
tray she was holding and screamed.
 It sounded like the sort of scream that brings muscular help. Rincewind, awash with fear-distilled
adrenalin, turned and barged past her. There were more seats here, and the people in them ducked as he
dragged Twoflower urgently along the central gangway. Beyond the rows of seats were little windows.
Beyond the windows, against a background of fleecy clouds, was a dragon's wing. It was silver.
 I've been eaten by a dragon, he thought. That's ridiculous, he replied, you can't see out of dragons. Then
his shoulder hit the door at the far end of the tunnel, and he followed it through into a cone-shaped room
that was even stranger than the tunnel.
 It was full of tiny glittering lights. Among the lights, in contoured chairs, were four men who were now
staring at him open-mouthed. As he stared back he saw their gazes dart sideways. Rincewind turned
slowly. Beside him was a fifth man - youngish, bearded, as swarthy as the nomad folk of the Great Nef.
 Where am I? said the wizard. in the belly of a dragon?
 The young man crouched back and shoved a small black box in the wizard's face. The men in the chairs
ducked down.
 What is it? said Rincewind. A picture box? He reached out and took it, a movement which appeared
to surprise the swarthy man, who shouted and tried to snatch it back. There was another shout, this time
from one of the men in the chairs. Only now he wasn't sitting. He was standing up, pointing something
small and metallic at the young man.
 It had an amazing effect. The man crouched back with his hands in the air.
 Please give me the bomb, sir, said the man with the metallic thing. Carefully, please.
 This thing? said Rincewind.
 You have it–
 I don't want it!
 The man took it very carefully and put it on the floor. The seated men relaxed, and one of them started
speaking urgently to the wall. The wizard watched him in amazement.
 Don't move. snapped the man with the metal– an amulet, Rincewind decided, it must be an amulet. The
swarthy man backed into the corner.
 That was a very brave thing you did, said Amulet-holder to Rincewind. You know that?
 What?
 What's the matter with your friend?
 Friend?
 Rincewind looked down at Twoflower, who was still slumbering peacefully. That was no surprise. What
was really surprising was that Twoflower was wearing new clothes. Strange clothes. His britches now
ended just above his knees. Above that he wore some sort of vest of brightly-striped material. On his
head was a ridiculous little straw hat. With a feather in it.
 An awkward feeling around the leg regions made Rincewind look down. His clothes had changed too.
Instead of the comfortable old robe, so marvellously well-adapted for speed into action in all possible
contingencies, his legs were encased in cloth tubes. He was wearing a jacket of the same grey material
 Until now he'd never heard the language the man with the amulet was using. It was uncouth and vaguely
Hublandish - so why could he understand every word?
 Let's see, they'd suddenly appeared in this dragon after, they'd materialised in this drag, they'd sudd,
they'd, they'd - they had struck up a conversation in the airport so naturally they had chosen to sit
together on the plane, and he'd promised to show Jack Zweiblumen around when they got back to the
States. Yes, that was it. And then Jack had been taken ill and he'd panicked and come through here and
surprised this hijacker. Of course. What on earth was Hublandish? Dr Rjinswand rubbed his forehead.
What he could do with was a drink.
 Ripples of paradox spread out across the sea of causality.
 Possibly the most important point that would have to be borne in mind by anyone outside the sum totality
of the multiverse was that although the wizard and the tourist had indeed only recently appeared in an
aircraft in mid-air, they had also at one and the same time been riding on that aeroplane in the normal
course of things. That is to say while it was true that they had just appeared in this particular set of
dimensions, it was also true that they had been living in them all along. It is at this point that normal
language gives up, and goes and has a drink.
 The point is that several quintillion atoms had just materialized (however, they had not. See below) in a
universe where they should not strictly have been. The usual upshot of this sort of thing is a vast explosion
but, since universes are fairly resilient things, this particular universe had saved itself by instantaneously
unravelling its spacetime continuum back to a point where the surplus atoms could safely be
accommodated and then rapidly rewinding back to that circle of firelight which for want of a better term
its inhabitants were wont to call The Present. This had of course changed history - there had been a few
less wars, a few extra dinosaurs and so on - but on the whole the episode passed remarkably quietly.
 Outside of this particular universe, however, the repercussions of the sudden double-take bounced to
and fro across the face of The Sum of Things, bending whole dimensions and sinking galaxies without a
trace.
 All this was however totally lost on Dr Rjinswand, 33, a bachelor, born in Sweden, raised in New
Jersey, and a specialist in the breakaway oxidation phenomena of certain nuclear reactors. Anyway, he
probably would not have believed any of it.
 Zweiblumen still seemed to be unconscious. The stewardess, who had helped Rjinswand to his seat to
the applause of the rest of the passengers, was bering over him anxiously.
 I radioed ahead, she told Rjinswand there'll be an ambulance waiting when we land Uh, it says on the
passenger list that you're a doctor
 I don't know what's wrong with him, said Rincewind hurriedly, it might be a different matter if he was a
Magnox reactor of course.
 Is it shock of some kind?
 I've never-
 Her sentence terminated in a tremendous crash from the rear of the plane. Several passengers screamed.
A sudden gale of air swept every loose magazine and newspaper into a screaming whirlwind that twisted
madly down the aisle.
 Something else was coming up the aisle.
 Something big and oblong and wooden and brassbound. It had hundreds of legs. If it was what it
seemed - a walking chest of the kind that appeared in pirate stories brim full of ill-gotten gold and jewels
- then what would have been its lid suddenly gaped open.
 There were no jewels. But there were lots of big square teeth, white as sycamore, and a pulsating
tongue, red as mahogany.
 An ancient suitcase was coming to eat him.
 Rjinswand clutched at the unconscious Zweiblumen for what little comfort there was there, and
gibbered. He wished fervently that he was somewhere else
 There was a sudden darkness.
 There was a brilliant flash.
 The sudden departure of several quintillion atoms from a universe that they had no right to be in anyway
caused a wild imbalance in the harmony of the Sum Totality which it tried frantically to retrieve, wiping
out a number of subrealities in the process. Huge surges of raw magic boiled uncontrolled around the
very foundations of the multiverse itself, welling up through every crevice into hitherto peaceful
dimensions and causing novas, supernovas, stellar collisions, wild flights of geese and drowning of
imaginary continents. Worlds as far away as the other end of time experienced brilliant sunsets of
corruscating octarine as highly-charged magical particles roared through the atmosphere. In the cometary
halo around the fabled Ice System of Zeret a noble comet died as a prince flamed across the sky.
 All this was however lost on Rincewind as, clutching the inert Twoflower around the waist, he plunged
towards the Disc's sea several hundred feet below. Not even the convulsions of all the dimensions could
break the iron Law of the Conservation of Energy, and Rjinswand's brief journey in the plane had
sufficed to carry him several hundred miles horizontally and seven thousand feet vertically.
 The word plane flamed and died in Rincewind's mind.
 Was that a ship down there?
 The cold waters of the Circle Sea roared up at him and sucked him down into their green, suffocating
embrace. A moment later there was another splash as the luggage, still bearing a label carrying the
powerful travelling rune TWA, also hit the sea.
 Later on, they used it as a raft.

 Close to the Edge

 It had been a long time in the making. Now it was almost completed, and the slaves hacked away at the
last clay remnants of the mantle.
 Where other slaves were industriously rubbing its metal flanks with silver sand it was already beginning
to gleam in the sun with the silken organic sheen of young bronze. It was still warm even after a week of
cooling in the casting pit. The Arch-astronomer of Krull motioned lightly with his hand and his bearers set
the throne down in the shadow of the hull.
 Like a fish, he thought. A great flying fish. And of what seas?
 It is indeed magnificent, he whispered. A work of true art.
 Craft, said the thickset man by his side. The Arch-astronomer turned slowly and looked up at the
man's impassive face. It isn't particularly hard for a face to look impassive-when there are two golden
spheres where the eyes should be. They glowed disconcertingly.
 Craft, indeed, said the astronomer, and smiled
 I would imagine that there is no greater craftsman on the entire disc than you, Goldeneyes. Would I be
right?
 The craftsman paused, his naked body - naked at least, were it not for a toolbelt, a wrist abacus and a
deep tan - tensing as he considered the implications of this last remark. The golden eyes appeared to be
looking into some other world.
 The answer is both yes and no, he said at last Some of the lesser astronomers behind the throne
gasped at this lack of etiquette, but the Arch astronomer appeared not to have noticed it.
 Continue, he said.
 There are some essential skills that I lack. Yet I am Goldeneyes Silverhand Dactylos, said the
craftsman. I made the Metal Warriors that guard the Tomb of Pitchiu, I designed the Light Dams of the
Great Nef, I built the Palace of the Seven Deserts. And yet- he reached up and tapped one of his eyes,
which rang faintly, when I built the golem army for Pitchiu he loaded me down with gold and then, so
that I would create no other work to rival my work for him, he had my eyes put out.
 Wise but cruel, said the Arch-astronomer sympathetically.
 Yah. So I learned to hear the temper of metals and to see with my fingers. I learned how to distinguish
ores by taste and smell. I made these eyes, but I cannot make them see.
 Next I was summoned to build the Palace of the Seven Deserts, as a result of which the Emir showered
me with silver and then, not entirely to my surprise, had my right hand cut off.
 A grave hindrance in your line of business, nodded the Arch-astronomer.
 I used some of the silver to make myself this new hand, putting to use my unrivalled knowledge of
levers and fulcrums. It suffices. After I created the first great Light Dam, which had a capacity of 50,000
daylight hours, the tribal councils of the Nef loaded me down with fine silks and then hamstrung me so
that I could not escape. As a result I was put to some inconvenience to use the silk and some bamboo to
build a flying machine from which I could launch myself from the top-most turret of my prison.
 Bringing you, by various diversions, to Krull, said the Arch-astronomer. And one cannot help feeling
that some alternative occupation - lettuce farming, say - would offer somewhat less of a risk of being put
to death by instalments. Why do you continue in it? Goldeneyes Dactylos shrugged.
 I'm good at it, he said.
 The Arch-astronomer looked up again bronze fish, shining now like a gong in the noontime sun.
 Such beauty, he murmured. And unique. Come, Dactylos. Recall to me what it was that I promised
should be your reward?
 You asked me to design a fish that would swim through the seas of space that lie between the worlds,
intoned the master craftsman. In return for which - in return-
 Yes? My memory is not what it used to be, purred the Arch-astronomer, stroking the warm bronze.
 In return, continued Dactylos, without much apparent hope, you would set me free, and refrain from
chopping off any appendages. I require no treasure.
 Ah, yes. I recall now. The old man raised a blueveined hand, and added, I lied.
 There was the merest whisper of sound, and the goldeneyed man rocked on his feet. Then he looked
down at the arrowhead protruding from his chest, and nodded wearily. A speck of blood bloomed on his
lips.
 There was no sound in the entire square (save for the buzzing of a few expectant flies) as his silver hand
came up, very slowly, and fingered the arrowhead.
 Dactylos grunted.
 Sloppy workmanship, he said, and toppled backwards.
 The Arch-astronomer prodded the body with his toe, and sighed.
 There will be a short period of mourning, as befits a master craftsman, he said. He watched a
bluebottle alight on one golden eye and fly away puzzled That would seem to be long enough, said the
Arch-astronomer, and beckoned a couple of slaves to carry the corpse away.
 Are the chelonauts ready? he asked.
 The master launchcontroller hustled forward.
 Indeed, your prominence, he said.
 The correct prayers are being intoned?
 Quite so, your prominence.
 How long to the doorway?
 The launch window, corrected the master launchcontroller carefully. Three days, your prominence.
Great A'Tuin's tail will be in an unmatched position.
 Then all that remains, concluded the Arch-astronomer, is to find the appropriate sacrifice.
 The master launchcontroller bowed.
 The ocean shall provide, he said.
 The old man smiled. it always does, he said.
 If only you could navigate
 If only you could steer-

 A wave washed over the deck. Rincewind and Twoflower looked at each other. Keep bailing! they
screamed in unison, and reached for the buckets.
 After a while Twoflower's peevish voice filtered up from the waterlogged cabin.
 I don't see how it's my fault, he said. He handed up another bucket, which the wizard tipped over the
side.
 You were supposed to be on watch, snapped Rincewind.
 I saved us from the slavers, remember, said Twoflower.
 I'd rather be a slave than a corpse, replied the wizard. He straightened up and looked out to sea. He
appeared puzzled.
 He was a somewhat different Rincewind from the one that escaped the fire of Ankh-Morpork six
months before. More scarred, for one thing. And much more travelled. He had visited the Hublands,
discovered the curious folkways of many colourful peoples - invariably obtaining more scars in the
process - and had even, for a never-to-be-forgotten few days, sailed on the legendary Dehydrated
Ocean at the heart of the incredibly dry desert known as the Great Nef. On a colder and wetter sea he
had seen floating mountains of ice. He had ridden on an imaginary dragon. He had very nearly said the
most powerful spell on the disc. He had-
 -there was definitely less horizon than there ought to be.
 Hmm Said Rincewind.
 I said nothing's worse than slavery, said Twoflower. His mouth opened as the wizard flung his bucket
far out to sea and sat down heavily on the waterlogged deck, his face a grey mask.
 Look, I'm sorry I steered us into the reef, but this boat doesn't seem to want to sink and we're bound to
strike land sooner or later, said Twoflower comfortingly. This current must go somewhere.
 Look at the horizon, Said Rincewind, in a monotone.
 Twoflower squinted.
 It looks all right, he said after a while.
 Admittedly, there seems to be less than there usually is, but-
 That's because of the Rimfall, said Rincewind.
 We're being carried over the edge of the world.
 There was a long silence, broken only by the lapping of the waves as the foundering ship spun slowly in
the current. It was already quite strong.
 That's probably why we hit that reef, Rincewind added. we got pulled off course during the night.
 Would you like something to eat? asked Twoflower. He began to rummage through the bundle that he
had tied to the rail, out of the damp.
 Don't you understand? snarled Rincewind. We are going over the Edge, godsdammit!
 Can't we do anything about it?
 No!
 Then I can't see the sense in panicking, said Twoflower calmly.
 I knew we shouldn't have come this far Edgewise, complained Rincewind to the skye I wish-
 I wish I had my picture-box, said Twoflower, but it's back on that slaver ship with the rest of the
Luggage and-
 You won't need luggage where we're going, said Rincewind. He sagged, and stared moodily at a
distant whale that had carelessly strayed into the rimward current and was now struggling against it.
 There was a line of white on the foreshortened horizon, and the wizard fancied he could hear a distant
roaring.
 What happens after a ship goes over the Rimfall? said Twoflower.
 Who knows?
 Well, in that case perhaps we'll just sail on through space and land on another world. A faraway look
came into the little man's eyes. I'd like that, he said.
 Rincewind snorted.
 The sun rose in the sky, looking noticeably bigger this close to the Edge. They stood with their backs
against the mast, busy with their own thoughts. Every so often one or other would pick up a bucket and
do a bit of desultory bailing, for no very intelligent reason.
 The sea around them seemed to be getting crowded. Rincewind noticed several tree trunks keeping
station with them, and just below the surface the water was alive with fish of all sorts. The current must
be teeming with food washed from the continents near the Hub. He wondered what kind of life it would
be, having to keep swimming all the time to stay exactly in the same place. Pretty similar to his own, he
decided. He spotted a small green frog which was paddling desperately in the grip of the inexorable
current. To Twoflower's amazement he found a paddle and carefully extended it towards the little
amphibian, which scrambled onto it gratefully. A moment later a pair of jaws broke the water and
snapped impotently at the spot where it had been swimming.
 The frog looked up at Rincewind from the cradle of his hands, and then bit him thoughtfully on the
thumb. Twoflower giggled. Rincewind tucked the frog away in a pocket, and pretended he hadn't heard.
 All very humanitarian, but why? said Twoflower. It'll all be the same in an hour.
 Because, said Rincewind vaguely, and did a bit of bailing. Spray was being thrown up now and the
current was so strong that waves were forming and breaking all around them. It all seemed unnaturally
warm. There was a hot golden haze on the sea.
 The roaring was louder now. A squid bigger than anything Rincewind had seen before broke the surface
a few hundred yards away and thrashed madly with its tentacles before sinking away. Something else that
was large and fortunately unidentifiable howled in the mist. A whole squadron of flying fish tumbled up in
a cloud of rainbow-edged droplets and managed to gain a few yards before dropping back and being
swept in an eddy.
 They were running out of world. Rincewind dropped his bucket and snatched at the mast as the roaring,
final end of everything raced towards them.
 I must see this said Twoflower, half falling and half diving towards the prow.
 Something hard and unyielding smacked into the hull, which spun ninety degrees and came side on to the
invisible obstacle. Then it stopped suddenly and a wash of cold sea foam cascaded over the deck, so
that for a few seconds Rincewind was under several feet of boiling green water. He began to scream and
then the underwater world became the deep clanging purple colour of fading consciousness, because it
was at about this point that Rincewind started to drown.
 He awoke with his mouth full of burning liquid and, when he swallowed, the searing pain in his throat
jerked him into full consciousness. The boards of a boat pressed into his back and Twoflower was
looking down at him with an expression of deep concern. Rincewind groaned and sat up.
 This turned out to be a mistake. The edge of the world was a few feet away.
 Beyond it, at a level just below that of the lip of the endless Rimfall, was something altogether magical.

 Some seventy miles away, and well beyond the tug of the rim current, a scow with the red sails typical of
a freelance slaver drifted aimlessly through the velvety twilight. The crew - such as remained were
clustered on the foredeck, surrounding the men working feverishly on the raft.
 The captain, a thickset man who wore the elbowturbans typical of a Great Nef tribesman, was much
travelled and had seen many strange peoples and curious things, many of which he had subsequently
enslaved or stolen. He had begun his career as a sailor on the Dehydrated Ocean in the heart of the disc's
driest desert. (Water on the disc has an uncommon fourth state, caused by intense magic combined with
the strange desiccating effects of octarine light) it dehydrates, leaving a silvery mildue like free-flowing
sand through which a well-designed hull can glide with ease. The Dehydrated Ocean is a strange place,
but not so strange as its fish.) The captain had never before been really frightened. Now he was terrified.
 I can't hear anything, he muttered to the first mate. The mate peered into the gloom.
 Perhaps it fell overboard? he suggested hopefully. As if in answer there came a furious pounding from
the oar deck below their feet, and the sound of splintering wood. The crewmen drew together fearfully,
brandishing axes and torches.
 They probably wouldn't dare to use them, even if the Monster came rushing towards them. Before its
terrible nature had been truly understood several men had attacked it with axes, whereupon it had turned
aside from its single-minded searching of the ship and had either chased them overboard or had - eaten
them? The captain was not quite certain. The Thing looked like an ordinary wooden sea chest. A bit
larger than usual, maybe, but not suspiciously so. But while it sometimes seemed to contain things like old
socks and miscellaneous luggage, at other times - and he shuddered - it seemed to be, seemed to have
He tried not to think about it. It was just that the men who had been drowned overboard had probably
been more fortunate than those it had caught. He tried not to think about it. There had been teeth, teeth
like white wooden gravestones, and a tongue red as mahogany
 He tried not to think about it. It didn't work. But he thought bitterly about one thing. This was going to
be the last time he rescued ungrateful drowning men in mysterious circumstances. Slavery was better than
sharks, wasn't it? And then they had escaped and when his sailors had investigated their big chest - how
had they appeared in the middle of an untroubled ocean sitting on a big chest, anyway? - and it had bitt
He tried not to think about it again, but he found himself wondering what would happen when the
damned thing realized that its owner wasn't on board any longer
 Raft's ready, lord, said the first mate.
 Into the water with it, shouted the captain, and Get aboard! and Fire the ship!
 After all, another ship wouldn't be too hard to come by, he philosophised, but a man might have to wait
a long time in that Paradise the mullahs advertised before he was granted another life. Let the magical box
eat lobsters.
 Some pirates achieved immortality by great deeds of cruelty or derring-do. Some achieved immortality
by amassing great wealth. But the captain had long ago decided that he would, on the whole, prefer to
achieve immortality by not dying.

 What the hell is that? demanded Rincewind.
 It's beautiful, said Twoflower beatifically.
 I'll decide about that when I know what it is, said the wizard.
 It is the Rimbow, said a voice immediately behind his left ear, And you are fortunate indeed to be
looking at it. From above, at any rate. and the voice was accompanied by a gust of cold and fishy
breath, Rincewind sat quite still.
 Twoflower? he said.
 Yes?
 If I turn around, what will I see?
 His name is Tethis. He says he's a sea troll. This is his boat. He rescued us, explained Twoflower
 Will you look around now?
 Not just at the moment, thank you. So why aren't we going over the Edge, then? asked Rincewind
with glassy calmness.
 Because your boat hit the Circumfence, said the voice behind him (in tones that made Rincewind
imagine submarine chasms and lurking Things in coral reefs).
 The Circumfence? he repeated.
 Yes. It runs along the edge of the world, said the unseen troll. Above the roar of the waterfall
Rincewind thought he could make out the splash of oars. He hoped they were oars.
 Ah. You mean the circumference, said Rincewind. The circumference makes the edge of things.
 So does the Circumfence, said the troll.
 He means this, said Twoflower, pointing down Rincewind's eyes followed the finger, dreading what
they might see
 Hubwards of the boat was a rope suspended a few feet above the surface of the white water. The boat
was attached to it, moored yet mobile, by a complicated arrangement of pulleys and little wooden
wheels. They ran along the rope as the unseen rower propelled the craft along the very lip of the Rimfall.
That explained one mystery - but what supported the rope?
 Rincewind peered along its length and saw a stout wooden post sticking up out of the water a few yards
ahead. As he watched the boat neared it and then passed it, the little wheels clacking neatly around it in a
groove obviously cut for the purpose. Rincewind also noticed that smaller ropes hung down from the
main rope at intervals of a yard or so.
 He turned back to Twoflower.
 I can see what it is, he said, But what is it?
 Twoflower shrugged. Behind Rincewind the sea troll said, Up ahead is my house. We will talk more
when we are there. Now I must row.
 Rincewind found that looking ahead meant that he would have to turn and find out what a sea troll
actually looked like, and he wasn't sure he wanted to do that yet. He looked at the Rimbow instead. It
hung in the mists a few lengths beyond the edge of the world, appearing only at morning and evening
when the light of the Disc's little orbiting sun shone past the massive bulk of Great A'tuin the World Turtle
and struck the Disc's magical field at exactly the right angle.
 A double rainbow corruscated into being. Close into the lip of the Rimfall were the seven lesser colours,
sparkling and dancing in the spray of the dying seas.
 But they were pale in comparison to the wider band that floated beyond them, not deigning to share the
same spectrum. It was the King Colour, of which all the lesser colours are merely partial and
wishy-washy reflections. It was octarine, the colour of magic. It was alive and glowing and vibrant and it
was the undisputed pigment of the imagination, because wherever it appeared it was a sign that mere
matter was a servant of the powers of the magical mind. It was enchantment itself. But Rincewind always
thought it looked a sort of greenish-purple.
 After a while a small speck on the rim of the world resolved itself into a eyot or crag, so perilously
perched that the waters of the fall swirled around it at the start of their long drop. A driftwood shanty had
been built on it, and Rincewind saw that the top rope of the Circumfence climbed over the rocky island
on a number of iron stakes and actually passed through the shack by a small round window. He learned
later that this was so that the troll could be alerted to the arrival of any salvage on his stretch of the
Circumfence by means of a series of small bronze bells, balanced delicately on on the rope.
 A floating stockade had been built out of rough timber on the hubward side of the island. It contained
one or two hulks and quite a large amount of floating wood in the form of planks, baulks and even whole
natural tree trunks, some still sporting green leaves. This close to the Edge the disc's magical field was so
intense that a hazy corona flickered across everything as raw illusion spontaneously discharged itself.
 With a last few squeaky jerks the boat slid up against a small driftwood jetty. As it grounded itself and
formed a circuit Rincewind felt all the familiar sensations of a huge occult aura - oily, bluish-tasting, and
smelling of tin. All around them pure, unfocused magic was sleeting soundlessly into the world.
 The wizard and Twoflower scrambled onto the planking and for the first time Rincewind saw the troll.
 It wasn't half so dreadful as he had imagined. Umm, said his imagination after a while.
 It wasn't that the troll was horrifying. Instead of the rotting, betentacled monstrosity he had been
expecting Rincewind found himself looking at a rather squat but not particularly ugly old man who would
quite easily have passed for normal on any city street, always provided that other people on the street
were used to seeing old men who were apparently composed of water and very little else. It was as if the
ocean had decided to create life without going through all that tedious business of evolution, and had
simply formed a part of itself into a biped and sent it walking squishily up the beach. The troll was a
pleasant translucent blue colour. As Rincewind stared a small shoal of silver fish flashed across its chest.
 It's rude to stare, said the troll. Its mouth opened with a little crest of foam, and shut again in exactly
the same way that water closes over a stone.
 Is it? Why? asked Rincewind. How does he hold himself together, his mind screamed at him. Why
doesn't he spill?
 If you will follow me to my house I will find you food and a change of clothing, said the troll solemnly.
He set off over the rocks without turning to see if they would follow him. After all, where else could they
go? It was getting dark, and a chilly damp breeze was blowing over the edge of the world. Already the
transient Rimbow had faded and the mists above the waterfall were beginning to thin.
 Come on, said Rincewind, grabbing Twoflower's elbow. But the tourist didn't appear to want to move.
 Come on, the wizard repeated.
 When it gets really dark, do you think we'll be able to look down and see Great A'tuin the World
Turtle? asked Twoflower, staring at the rolling clouds.
 I hope not, said Rincewind, I really do. Now let's go, shall we?
 Twoflower followed him reluctantly into the shack. The troll had lit a couple of lamps and was sitting
comfortably in a rocking chair. He got to his feet as they entered and poured two cups of a green liquid
from a tall pitcher. In the dim light he appeared to phosphoresce, in the manner of warm seas on velvety
summer nights. Just to add a baroque gloss to Rincewind's dull terror he seemed to be several inches
taller, too.
 Most of the furniture in the room appeared to be boxes.
 Uh. Really great place you've got here, said Rincewind. Ethnic.
 He reached for a cup and looked at the green pool shimmering inside it. It'd better be drinkable, he
thought. Because I'm going to drink it. He swallowed.
 It was the same stuff Twoflower had given him in the rowing boat but, at the time, his mind had ignored it
because there were more pressing matters. Now it had the leisure to savour the taste.
 Rincewind's mouth twisted. He whimpered a little. One of his legs came up convulsively and caught him
painfully in the chest.
 Twoflower swirled his own drink thoughtfully while he considered the flavour.
 Ghlen Livid, he said. The fermented vul nut drink they freeze-distil in my home country. A certain
smokey quality Piquant. From the western plantations in, ah, Rehigreed Province, yes? Next year's
harvest, I fancy, from the colour. May I ask how you came by it?
 (Plants on the disc, while including the categories known commonly as annuals, which were sown this
year to come up later this year, rieanuals, sown this year to grow next year, and perennials, sown this
year to grow until further notice, also included a few rare re-annuals which, because of an unusual
four-dimensional twist in their genes, could be planted this year to come up last year. The Vul nut vine
was particularly exceptional in that it could flourish as many as eight years prior to its seed actually being
sown. Vul nut wine was reputed to give certain drinkers an insight into the future which was, from the
nut's point of view, the past. Strange but true.)
 All things drift into the Circumfence in time, said the troll, gnomically, gently rocking in his chair. My
job is to recover the flotsam. Timber, of course, and ships. Barrels of wine. Bales of cloth. You.
 Light dawned inside Rincewind's head.
 It's a net, isn't it? You've got a net right on the edge of the Sea!
 The Circumfence, nodded the troll. Ripples radiating across his chest.
 Rincewind looked out into the phosphorescent darkness that surrounded the island, and grinned inanely.
 Of course, he said. Amazing! You could sink piles and attach it to reefs and - good grief! The net
would have to be very strong.
 It is, said Tethis.
 It could be extended for a couple of miles, if you found enough rocks and things, said the wizard.
 Ten thousands of miles. I just patrol this length.
 That's a third of the way around the disc!
 Tethis sloshed a little as he nodded again. While the two men helped themselves to some more of the
green wine, he told them about the Circumfence, the great effort that had been made to build it, and the
ancient and wise Kingdom of Krull which had constructed it several centuries before, and the seven
navies that patrolled it constantly to keep it in repair and bring its salvage back to Krull, and the manner
in which Krull had become a land of leisure ruled by the most learned seekers after knowledge, and the
way in which they sought constantly to understand in every possible particular the wondrous complexity
of the universe, and the way in which sailors marooned on the Circumfence were turned into slaves, and
usually had their tongues cut out. After some interjections at this point he spoke, in a friendly way, on the
futility of force, the impossibility of escaping from the island except by boat to one of the other three
hundred and eighty isles that lay between the island and Krull itself, or by leaping over the Edge and the
high merit of muteness in comparison to for example, death.
 There was a pause. The muted night-roar of the Rimfall only served to give the silence a heavier texture.
 The rocking chair started to creak again. Tethis seemed to have grown alarmingly during the monologue.
 There is nothing personal in all this, he added. I, too, am a slave. If you try to overpower me I shall
have to kill you, of course, but I won't take any particular pleasure in it.
 Rincewind looked at the shimmering fists that rested lightly in the troll's lap. He suspected they could
strike with all the force of a tsunami.
 I don't think you understand, explained Twoflower. I am a citizen of the Golden Empire. I'm sure
Krull would not wish to incur the displeasure of the Emperor.
 How will the emperor know? asked the troll.
 Do you think you're the first person from the Empire who has ended up on the Circumfence?
 I won't be a slave, shouted Rincewind. I'd - I'd jump over the Edge first! He was amazed at the
sound in his own voice.
 Would you, though? asked the troll. The rocking chair flicked back against the wall and one blue arm
caught the wizard around the waist. A moment later the troll was striding out of the shack with Rincewind
gripped carelessly in one fist.
 He did not stop until he came to the Rimward edge of the island. Rincewind squealed.
 Stop that or I really will throw you over the edge, snapped the troll. I'm holding you, aren't I? Look.
 Rincewind looked.
 In front of him was a soft black night whose mist-muted stars glowed peacefully. But his eyes turned
downwards, drawn by some irresistible fascination.
 It was midnight on the Disc and so, therefore, the sun was far, far below, swinging slowly under Great
A'Tuin's vast and frosty plastron. Rincewind tried a last attempt to fix his gaze on the tips of his boots,
which were protruding over the rim of the rock, but the sheer drop wrenched it away.
 On either side of him two glittering curtains of water hurtled towards infinity as the sea swept around the
island on its way to the long fall. A hundred yards below the wizard the largest sea salmon he had ever
seen flicked itself out of the foam in a wild, jerky and ultimately hopeless leap. Then it fell back, over and
over, in the golden underworld light.
 Huge shadows grew out of that light like pillars supporting the roof of the universe. Hundreds of miles
below him the wizard made out the shape of something, the edge of something-
 Like those curious little pictures where the silhouette of an ornate glass suddenly becomes the outline of
two faces, the scene beneath him flipped into a whole, new, terrifying perspective. Because down there
was the head of an elephant as big as a reasonably-sized continent. One mighty tusk cut like a mountain
against the golden light, trailing a widening shadow towards the stars. The head was slightly tilted, and a
huge ruby eye might almost have been a red super-giant that had managed to shine at noonday.
 Below the elephant-Rincewind swallowed and tried not to think-Below the elephant there was nothing
but the distant, painful disc of the sun. And, sweeping slowly past it, was something that for all its
city-sized scales, its crater-pocks, its lunar cragginess, was indubitably a flipper.
 Shall I let go? suggested the troll
 Gnah, said Rincewind, straining backwards.
 I have lived here on the Edge for five years and I have not had the courage, boomed Tethis. Nor have
you, if I'm any judge. He stepped back, allowing Rincewind to fling himself onto the ground.
 Twoflower strolled up to the rim and peered over.
 Fantastic, he said. If only I had my picture box.
 What else is down there? I mean, if you fell off, what would you see?
 Tethis sat down on an outcrop. High over the disc the moon came out from behind a cloud, giving him
the appearance of ice.
 My home is down there, perhaps, he said slowly. Beyond your silly elephants and that ridiculous
turtle. A real world. Sometimes I come out here and look, but somehow I can never bring myself to take
that extra step A real world, with real people. I have wives and little ones, somewhere down there
He stopped, and blew his nose. You soon learn what you're made of, here on the Edge.
 Stop saying that. Please, moaned Rincewind. He turned over and saw Twoflower standing
unconcernedly at the very lip of the rock. Gnah, he said, and tried to burrow into the stone.
 There's another world down there? said Twoflower, peering over. Where, exactly?
 The troll waved an arm vaguely. Somewhere, he said. That's all I know. It was quite a small world.
Mostly blue.
 So why are you here? said Twoflower.
 Isn't it obvious? snapped the troll. I fell off the edge!
 He told them of the world of Bathys, somewhere among the Stars, where the seafolk had built a number
of thriving civilisations in the three large oceans that sprawled across its disc. He had been a meatman,
one of the caste which earned a perilous living in large, sail-powered land yachts that ventured far out to
land and hunted the shoals of deer and buffalo that abounded in the stormhaunted continents. His
particular yacht had been blown into uncharted lands by a freak gale. The rest of the crew had taken the
yacht's little rowing trolley and had struck out for a distant lake, but Tethis, as master, had elected to
remain with his Vessel. The storm had carried it right over the rocky rim of the world, smashing it to
matchwood in the process.
 At first I fell, said Tethis, but falling isn't so bad, you know. It's only the landing that hurts, and there
was nothing below me. As I fell I saw the world spin off into space until it was lost against the stars.
 What happened next? said Twoflower breathlessly, glancing towards the misty universe.
 I froze solid, said Tethis simply. Fortunately it is something my race can survive. But I thawed out
occasionally when I passed near other worlds. There was one, I think it was the one with what, I thought
was this strange ring of mountains around it that turned out to be the biggest dragon you could ever
imagine, covered in snow and glaciers and holding its tail in its mouth - well, I came within a few leagues
of that, I shot over the landscape like a comet, in fact, and then I was off again. Then there was a time I
woke up and there was your world coming at me like a custard pie thrown by the Creator and, well, I
landed in the sea not far from the Circumfence widdershins of Krull. All sorts of creatures get washed up
against the Fence, and at the time they were looking for slaves to man the way stations, and I ended up
here. He stopped and stared intently at Rincewind. every night I come out here and look down. he
finished and I never jump. Courage is hard to come by, here on the Edge.
 Rincewind began to crawl determinedly towards the shack. He gave a little scream as the troll picked
him up, not unkindly, and set him on his feet.
 Amazing, said Twoflower, and leaned further out over the Edge. There are lots of other worlds out
there?
 Quite a number, I imagine, said the troll.
 I suppose one could contrive some sort of, I don't know, some sort of a thing that could preserve one
against the cold, said the little man thoughtfully. Some sort of a ship that one could sail over the Edge
and sail to far-off worlds, too. I wonder
 Don't even think about it! moaned Rincewind.
 Stop talking like that, do you hear?
 They all talk like that in Krull, said Tethis. Those with tongues, of course, he added.
 Are you awake?
 Twoflower snored on. Rincewind jabbed him viciously in the ribs.
 I said, are you awake? he snarled.
 Scrdfngh
 We've got to get out of here before this salvage fleet comes!

 The dishwater light of dawn oozed through the shack's one window, slopping across the piles of
salvaged boxes and bundles that were strewn around the interior. Twoflower grunted again and tried to
burrow into the pile of furs and blankets that Tethis had given them.
 Look, there's all kinds of weapons and stuff in here, said Rincewind. He's gone out somewhere.
When he comes back we could overpower him and- and- well, then we can think of something. How
about it?
 That doesn't sound like a very good idea, said Twoflower. Anyhow, it's a bit ungracious isn't it?
 Tough buns, snapped Rincewind. This is a rough universe.
 He rummaged through the piles around the walls and selected a heavy, wavy-bladed scimitar that had
probably been some pirate's pride and joy. It looked the sort of weapon that relied as much on its weight
as its edge to cause damage. He raised it awkwardly.
 Would he leave that sort of thing around if it could hurt him? Twoflower wondered aloud.
 Rincewind ignored him and took up a position beside the door. When it opened some ten minutes later
he moved unhesitatingly, swinging it across the opening at what he judged was the troll's head height. It
swished harmlessly through nothing at all and struck the doorpost, jerking him off his feet and on to the
floor.
 There was a sigh above him. He looked up into Tethis' face, which was shaking sadly from side to side.
 It wouldn't have harmed me, said the troll, but nevertheless, I am hurt. Deeply hurt. He reached over
the wizard and jerked the sword out of the wood. With no apparent effort he bent its blade into a circle
and sent it bowling away over the rocks until it hit a stone and sprang, still spinning, in a silver arc that
ended in the mists forming over the Rimfall.
 Very deeply hurt, he concluded. He reached down beside the door and tossed a sack towards
Twoflower.
 It's the carcass of a deer that is just about how you humans like it, and a few lobsters, and a sea
salmon. The Circumfence provides, he said casually.
 He looked hard at the tourist, and then down again at Rincewind.
 What are you staring at? he said.
 It's just that- said Twoflower.
 -compared to last night- said Rincewind.
 You're so small, finished Twoflower.
 I see, said the troll carefully.Personal remarks now. He drew himself up to his full height, which was
currently about four feet. Just because I'm made of water doesn't mean I'm made of wood, you know.
 I'm sorry, said Twoflower, climbing hastily out of the furs.
 You're made of dirt, said the troll,but I didn't pass comments about things you can't help, did I? Oh,
no. We can't help the way the Creator made us, that's my view, but if you must know, your moon here is
rather more powerful than the ones around my own world.
 The moon? said Twoflower.I don't under-
 If I've got to spell it out, said the troll. testily, I'm suffering from chronic tides.
 A bell jangled in the darkness of the shack. Tethis strode across the creaking floor to the complicated
devices of levers, strings and bells that was mounted on the Circumfence's topmost strand where it
passed through the hut.
 The bell rang again, and then started to clang away in an odd jerky rhythm for several minutes. The troll
stood with his ear pressed close to it.
 When it stopped he turned slowly and looked at them with a worried frown.
 You're more important than I thought, he said.
 You're not to wait for the salvage fleet. You're to be collected by a flyer. That's what they say in Krull.
He shrugged. And I hadn't even sent a message that you're here, yet. Someone's been drinking vul nut
wine again.
 He picked up a large mallet that hung on a pillar beside the bell and used it to tap out a brief carillon.
 That'll be passed from lengthman to lengthman all the way back to Krull, he said. Marvellous really,
isn't it?

 It came speeding across the sea, floating a man-length above it, but still leaving a foaming wake as
whatever power that held it up smacked brutally into the water. Rincewind knew what power held it up.
He was, he would be the first to admit, a coward, an incompetent, and not even very good at being a
failure; but he was still a wizard of sorts, he knew one of the Eight Great Spells, he would be claimed by
Death himself when he died and he recognized really finely honed magic when he saw it.
 The lens skimming towards the island was perhaps twenty feet across, and totally transparent. Sitting
around its circumference were a large number of black-robed men, each one strapped securely to the
disc by a leather harness and each one staring down at the waves with an expression so tormented, so
agonising, that the transparent disc seemed to be ringed with gargoyles.
 Rincewind sighed with relief. This was such an unusual sound that it made Twoflower take his eyes off
the approaching disc and turn them on him.
 We're important, no lie, explained Rincewind.
 They wouldn't be wasting all that magic on a couple of potential slaves. He grinned.
 What is it? said Twoflower.
 Well, the disc itself would have been created by Fresnel's Wonderful Concentrator, said Rincewind,
authoritatively. That calls for many rare and unstable ingredients, such as demon's breath and so forth,
and it takes at least eight fourthgrade wizards a week to envision. Then there's those wizards on it, who
must all be gifted hydrophobes-
 You mean they hate water? said Twoflower.
 No, that wouldn't work, said Rincewind.Hate is an attracting force, just like love. They really loathe it,
the very idea of it revolts them. A really good hydrophobe has to be trained on dehydrated water from
birth. I mean, that costs a fortune in magic alone. But they make great weather magicians. Rain clouds
just give up and go away.
 It sounds terrible, said the water troll behind them.
 And they all die young, said Rincewind, ignoring him. They just can't live with themselves.
 Sometimes I think a man could wander across the disc all his life and not see everything there is to see,
said Twoflower. And now it seems there are lots of other worlds as well. When I think I might die
without seeing a hundredth of all there is to see it makes me feel, he paused, then added, well, humble, I
suppose. And very angry, of course.
 The flyer halted a few yards hubward of the island, throwing up a sheet of spray. It hung there, spinning
slowly. A hooded figure standing by the stubby pillar at the exact centre of the lens beckoned to them.
 You'd better wade out, said the troll. It doesn't do to keep them waiting. It has been nice to make
your acquaintance. He shook them both, wetly, by the hand. As he waded out a little way with them the
two nearest loathers on the lens shied away with expressions of extreme disgust.
 The hooded figure reached down with one hand and released a rope ladder. In its other hand it held a
silver rod, which had about it the unmistakable air of something designed for killing people. Rincewind's
first impression was reinforced when the figure raised the stick and waved it carelessly towards the shore.
A section of rock vanished, leaving a small grey haze of nothingness.
 That's so you don't think I'm afraid to use it, said the figure.
 Don't think you're afraid? said Rincewind. The hooded figure snorted.
 We know all about you, Rincewind the magician. You are a man of great cunning and artifice. You
laugh in the face of Death. Your affected air of craven cowardice does not fool me.
 It fooled Rincewind. I- he began, and paled as the nothingness-stick was turned towards him. I see
you know all about me, he finished weakly, and sat down heavily on the slippery surface. He and
Twoflower, under instructions from the hooded commander, strapped themselves down to rings set in the
transparent disc.
 If you make the merest suggestion of weaving a spell, said the darkness under the hood, you die.
Third quadrant reconcile, ninth quadrant redouble, forward all!
 A wall of water shot into the air behind Rincewind and the disc jerked suddenly. The dreadful presence
of the sea troll had probably concentrated the hydrophobes' minds wonderfully, because it then rose at a
very steep angle and didn't begin level flight until it was a dozen fathoms above the waves. Rincewind
glanced down through the transparent surface and wished he hadn't.
 Well, off again then, said Twoflower cheerfully. He turned and waved at the troll, now no more than a
speck on the edge of the world.
 Rincewind glared at him. Doesn't anything ever worry you? he asked.
 We're still alive, aren't we? asked Twoflower. And you yourself said they wouldn't be going to all this
trouble if we were just going to be slaves. I expect Tethis was exaggerating. I expect it's all a
misunderstanding. I expect we'll be sent home. After we've seen Krull, of course. And I must say it all
sounds fascinating.
 Oh yes, said Rincewind, in a hollow voice. Fascinating. He was thinking I've seen excitement, and
I've seen boredom. And boredom was best.

 Had either of them happened to look down at that moment they would have noticed a strange v-shaped
wave surging through the water far below them, its apex pointing directly at Tethis' island. But they
weren't looking. The twenty-four hydrophobic magicians were looking, but to them it was just another
piece of dreadfulness, not really any different from the liquid horror around it. They were probably right.
 Sometime before all this the blazing pirate ship had hissed under the waves and started the long slow
slide towards the distant ooze. It was more distant than average, because directly under the stricken keel
was the Gorunna Trench - a chasm in the Disc's surface that was so black, so deep and so reputedly evil
that even the krakens went there fearfully, and in pairs. In less reputedly evil chasms the fish went about
with natural lights on their heads and on the whole managed quite well. In Gorunna they left them unlit
and, insofar as it is possible for something without legs to creep, they crept; they tended to bump into
things, too. Horrible things.
 The water around the ship turned from green to purple, from purple to black, from black to a darkness
so complete that blackness itself seemed merely grey by comparison. Most of its timbers had already
been crushed into splinters under the intense pressure.
 It spiralled past groves of nightmare polyps and drifting forests of seaweed which glowed with faint,
diseased colours. Things brushed it briefly with soft, cold tentacles as they darted away into the freezing
silence.
 Something rose up from the murk and ate it in one mouthful.
 Some time later the islanders on a little rimward atoll were amazed to find, washed into their little local
lagoon, the wave-rocked corpse of a hideous sea monster, all beaks, eyes and tentacles. They were
further astonished at its size, since it was rather larger than their village. But their surprise was tiny
compared to the huge, stricken expression on the face of the dead monster, which appeared to have
been trampled to death.
 Somewhat further rimward of the atoll a couple of little boats, trolling a net for the ferocious
free-swimming oysters which abounded in those seas, caught something that dragged both vessels for
several miles before one captain had the presence of mind to sever the lines.
 But even his bewilderment was as nothing compared to that of the islanders on the last atoll in the
archipelago. During the following night they were awakened by a terrific crashing and splintering noise
coming from their minute jungle; when some of the bolder spirits went to investigate in the morning they
found that the trees had been smashed in a broad swathe that started on the hubmost shore of the atoll
and made a line of total destruction pointing precisely Edgewise, littered with broken lianas, crushed
bushes and a few bewildered and angry oysters.

 They were high enough now to see the wide curve of the Rim sweeping away from them, lapped by the
fluffy clouds that mercifully hid the waterfall for most of the time. From up here the sea, a deep blue
dappled with cloud-shadows, looked almost inviting. Rincewind shuddered.
 Excuse me, he said. The hooded figure turned from its contemplation of the distant haze and raised its
wand threateningly.
 I don't want to use this, it said.
 You don't? said Rincewind.
 What is it, anyway? said Twoflower.
 Ajandurah's Wand of Utter Negativity, said Rincewind. And I wish you'd stop waving it about. It
might go off, he added, nodding at the wand's glittering point. I mean, it's all very flattering, all this magic
being used just for our benefit, but there's no need to go quite that far. And-
 Shut up. The figure reached up and pulled back its hood, revealing itself to be a most unusually tinted
young woman. Her skin was black. Not the dark brown of Urabewe, or the polished blue-black of
monsoon-haunted Klatch, but the deep black of midnight at the bottom of a cave. Her hair and eyebrows
were the colour of moonlight. There was the same pale sheen around her lips. She looked about fifteen,
and very frightened.
 Rincewind couldn't help noticing that the hand holding the wand was shaking, this was because a piece
of sudden death, wobbling uncertainly a-mere five feet from your nose, is very hard to miss. It dawned
on him - very slowly, because it was a completely new sensation - that someone in the world was
frightened of him. The complete reverse was so often the case that he had come to think of it as a kind of
natural law.
 What is your name? he said, as reassuringly as he could manage. She might be frightened, but she did
have the wand. If I had a wand like that, he thought, I wouldn't be frightened of anything. So what in
Creation can she imagine I could do?
 My name is immaterial, she said.
 That's a pretty name, said Rincewind. Where are you taking us, and why? I can't see any harm in your
telling us.
 You are being brought to Krull, said the girl. And don't mock me, hublander. Else I'll use the wand. I
must bring you in alive, but no-one said anything about bringing you in whole. My name is Marchesa, and
I am a wizard of the fifth level. Do you understand?
 Well, since you know all about me then you know that I never even made it to Neophyte, said
Rincewind. I'm not even a wizard, really. He caught Twoflower's astonished expression, and added
hastily, Just a wizard of sorts.
 You can't do magic because one of the Eight Great Spells is indelibly lodged in your mind, said
Marchesa, shifting her balance gracefully as the great lens described a wide arc over the sea. That's why
you were thrown out of Unseen University. We know.
 But you said just now that he was a magician of great cunning and artifice, protested Twoflower.
 Yes, because anyone who survives all that he has survived - most of which was brought on himself by
his tendency to think of himself as a wizard - well, he must be some kind of a magician, said Marchesa.
I warn you, Rincewind. If you give me the merest suspicion that you are intoning the Great Spell I really
will kill you. She scowled at him nervously.
 Seems to me your best course would be to just, you know, drop us off somewhere, said Rincewind.
 I mean, thanks for rescuing us and everything, so , if you'd just let us get on with leading our lives I'm
sure we'd all-
 I hope you're not proposing to enslave us, said Twoflower.
 Marchesa looked genuinely shocked. Certainly not! Whatever could have given you that idea? Your
lives in Krull will be rich, full and comfortable-
 Oh, good, said Rincewind.
 -just not very long.

 Krull turned out to be a large island, quite mountainous and heavily wooded, with pleasant white
buildings visible here and there among the trees. The land sloped gradually up towards the rim, so that the
highest point in Krull in fact slightly overhung the Edge. Here the Krullians had built their major city, also
called Krull, and since so much of their building material had been salvaged from the Circumfence the
houses of Krull had a decidedly nautical persuasion.
 To put it bluntly, entire ships had been mortic artfully together and converted into buildings. Triremes,
chows and caravels protruded at strange angles from the general wooden chaos. Painted figureheads and
hublandish dragonprows reminded the citizens of Krull that their good fortune stemmed from the sea;
barquentines and carracks lent a distinctive shape to the larger buildings. And so the city rose tier on tier
between the blue-green ocean of the Disc and the soft cloud sea of the Edge, the eight colours of the
Rimbow reflected in every window and in the many telescope lenses of the city's multitude of
astronomers.
 It's absolutely awful, said Rincewind gloomily.
 The lens was approaching now along the very lip of the rimfall. The island not only got higher as it neared
the Edge. It got narrower too, so that the lens was able to remain over water until it was very near the
city. The parapet along the edgewise cliff was dotted with gantries projecting into nothingness. The lens
glided smoothly towards one of them and docked with it as smoothly as a boat might glide up to a quay.
Four guards, with the same moonlight hair and nightblack faces as Marchesa, were waiting. They did not
appear to be armed, but as Twoflower and Rincewind stumbled on to the parapet they were each
grabbed by the arms and held quite firmly enough for any thought of escape to be instantly dismissed.
 Then Marchesa and the watching hydrophobic wizards were quickly left behind and the guards and their
prisoners set off briskly along a lane that wound between the ship-houses. Soon it lead downwards, into
what turned out to be a palace of some sort, half-hewn out of the rock of the cliff itself. Rincewind was
vaguely aware of brightly-lit tunnels, and courtyards open to the distant sky. A few elderly men, their
robes covered in mysterious occult symbols, stood aside and watched with interest as the sextet passed.
Several times Rincewind noticed hydrophobes - their ingrained expressions of self-revulsion at their own
body-fluids was distinctive- and here and there trudging men who could only be slaves. He didn't have
much time to reflect on all this before a door was opened ahead of them and they were pushed, gently
but firmly, into a room. Then the door slammed behind them.
 Rincewind and Twoflower regained their balance and stared around the room in which they now found
themselves.
 Gosh, said Twoflower ineffectually, after a pause during which he had tried unsuccessfully to find a
better word.
 This is a prison cell? wondered Rincewind aloud.
 All that gold and silk and stuff, Twoflower added. I've never seen anything like it!
 In the centre of the richly decorated room, on a carpet that was so deep and furry that Rincewind trod
on it gingerly lest it be some kind of shaggy, floor-loving beast, was a long gleaming table laden with
food. Most were fish dishes, including the biggest and most ornately-prepared lobster Rincewind had
ever seen, but there were also plenty of bowls and platters piled with strange creations that he had never
seen before. He reached out cautiously and picked up some sort of purple fruit crusted with green
crystals.
 Candied sea urchin, said a cracked, cheerful voice behind him. A great delicacy.
 He dropped it quickly and turned around. An old man had stepped out from behind the heavy curtains.
He was tall, thin and looked almost benign compared to some of the faces Rincewind had seen recently.
 The puree of sea cucumbers is very good too, said the face, conversationally. Those little green bits
are baby starfish.
 Thank you for telling me, said Rincewind weakly.
 Actually, they're rather good, said Twoflower, his mouth full. I thought you liked seafood?
 Yes, I thought I did, said Rincewind. What's this wine – crushed octopus eyeballs?
 Sea grape, said the old man.
 Great, said Rincewind, and swallowed a glassful. Not bad. A bit salty, maybe.
 Sea grape is a kind of small jellyfish, explained the stranger. And now I really think I should introduce
myself. Why has your friend gone that strange colour?
 Culture shock, I imagine, said Twoflower. What did you say your name was?
 I didn't. It's Garhartra. I'm the Guestmaster, you see. It is my pleasant task to make sure that your stay
here is as delightful as possible. He bowed. If there is anything you want you have only to say.
 Twoflower sat down on an ornate mother-of-pearl chair with a glass of oily wine in one hand and a
crystallised squid in the other. He frowned.
 I think I've missed something along the way, he said. First we were told we were going to be slaves-
 A base canard! interrupted Garhartra.
 What's a canard? said Twoflower.
 I think it's a kind of duck, said Rincewind from the far end of the long table. Are these biscuits made
of something really nauseating, do you suppose?
 -and then we were rescued at great magical expense-
 They're made of pressed seaweed, snapped the Guestmaster.
 -but then we're threatened, also at a vast expenditure of magic-
 Yes, I thought it would be something like seaweed, agreed Rincewind. They certainly taste like
seaweed would taste if anyone was masochistic enough to eat seaweed.
 –and then we're manhandled by guards and thrown in here–
 Pushed gently, corrected Garhartra.
 –which turned out to be this amazingly rich room and there's all this food and a man saying he's devoting
his life to making us happy, Twoflower concluded. What I'm getting at is this sort of lack of
consistency.
 Yar, said Rincewind. What he means is, are you about to start being generally unpleasant again? Is
this just a break for lunch?
 Garhartra held up his hands reassuringly.
 Please, please, he protested. It was just necessary to get you here as soon as possible. We certainly
do not want to enslave you. Please be reassured on that score.
 Well, fine, said Rincewind.
 Yes, you will in fact be sacrificed, Garhartra continued placidly.
 Sacrificed? You're going to kill us? shouted the wizard.
 Kill? Yes, of course. Certainly! It would hardly be a sacrifice if we didn't, would it? But don't worry -
it'll be comparatively painless.
 Comparatively? Compared to what? said Rincewind. He picked up a tall green bottle that was full of
sea grape jellyfish wine and hurled it hard at the Guestmaster, who flung up a hand as if to protect
himself.
 There was a crackle of octarine flame from his fingers and the air suddenly took on the thick, greasy feel
that indicated a powerful magical discharge. The flung bottle slowed and then stopped in mid-air, rotating
gently.
 At the same time an invisible force picked Rincewind up and hurled him down the length of the room,
pinning him awkwardly halfway up the far wall with no breath left in his body. He hung there with his
mouth open in rage and astonishment.
 Garhartra lowered his hand and brushed it slowly on his robe.
 I didn't enjoy doing that, you know, he said.
 I could tell, muttered Rincewind.
 But what do you want to sacrifice us for? asked Twoflower. You hardly know us!
 That's rather the point, isn't it? It's not very good manners to sacrifice a friend. Besides, you were, um,
specified. I don't know a lot about the god in question, but He was quite clear on that point. Look, I must
be running along now. So much to organise, you know how it is, the Guestmaster opened the door, and
then peered back around it. Please make yourselves comfortable, and don't worry.
 But you haven't actually told us anything! wailed Twoflower.
 It's not really worth it, is it? What with you being sacrificed in the morning, said Garhartra. It's hardly
worth the bother of knowing, really. Sleep well. Comparatively well, anyway.
 He shut the door. A brief octarine flicker of balefire around it suggested that it had now been sealed
beyond the skills of any earthly locksmith.

 Gling, clang, tangwent the bells along the Circumfence in the moonlit, rimfall-roaring night.
 Terton, lengthman of the 45th Length, hadn't heard such a clashing since the night a giant kraken had
been swept into the Fence five years ago. He leaned out of his hut, which for the lack of any convenient
eyot on this Length had been built on wooden piles driven into the sea bed, and stared into the darkness.
Once or twice he thought he could see movement, far off. Strictly speaking, he should row out to see
what was causing the din. But here in the clammy darkness it didn't seem like an astoundingly good idea,
so he slammed the door, wrapped some sacking around the madly jangling bells, and tried to get back to
sleep.
 That didn't work, because even the top strand of the Fence was thrumming now, as if something big and
heavy was bouncing on it. After staring at the ceiling for a few minutes, and trying hard not to think of
great long tentacles and pond-sized eyes, Terton blew out the lantern and opened the door a crack.
 Something was coming along the Fence, in giant loping bounds that covered metres at a time. It loomed
up at him and for a moment Terton saw something rectangular, multi-legged, shaggy with seaweed and -
although it had absolutely no features from which he could have deduced this - it was also very angry
indeed.
 The hut was smashed to fragments as the monster charged through it, although Terton survived by
clinging to the Circumfence; some weeks later he was picked up by a returning salvage fleet,
subsequently escaped from Krull on a hijacked lens (having developed hydrophobia to an astonishing
degree) and after a number of adventures eventually found his way to the Great Nef, an area of the Disc
so dry that it actually has negative rainfall, which he nevertheless considered uncomfortably damp.

 Have you tried the door?
 Yes, said Twoflower. And it isn't any less locked than it was last time you asked. There's the window,
though.
 A great way of escape, muttered Rincewind, from his perch halfway up the wall. You said it looks out
over the Edge. Just step out, eh, and plunge through space and maybe freeze solid or hit some other
world at incredible speeds or plunge wildly into the burning heart of a sun?
 Worth a try, said Twoflower. Want a seaweed biscuit?
 No!
 When are you coming down?
 Rincewind snarled. This was partly in embarrassment. Garhartra's spell had been the little-used and
hard-to-master Atavarr's Personal Gravitational Upset, the practical result of which was that until it wore
off Rincewind's body was convinced that down lay at ninety degrees to that direction normally
accepted as of a downward persuasion by the majority of the Disc's inhabitants. He was in fact standing
on the wall.
 Meanwhile the flung bottle hung supportless in the air a few yards away. In its case time had well, not
actually been stopped, but had been slowed by several orders of magnitude, and its trajectory had so far
occupied several hours and a couple of inches as far as Twoflower and Rincewind were concerned. The
glass gleamed in the moonlight. Rincewind sighed and tried to make himself comfortable on the wall.
 Why don't you ever worry? he demanded petulantly. Here we are, going to be sacrificed to some god
or other in the morning, and you just sit there eating barnacle canapes.
 I expect something will turn up, said Twoflower.
 I mean, it's not as if we know why we're going to be killed, the wizard went on.
 You'd like to, would you?
 Did you say that? asked Rincewind.
 Say what?
 Twoflower gave him a worried look.
 I'm Twoflower, he said. surely you remember?
 Rincewind put his head in his hands.
 It's happened at last, he moaned. I'm going out of my mind.
 Good ideasaid the voice.It's getting pretty crowded in here .
 The spell pinning Rincewind to the wall vanished with a faint pop. He fell forward and landed in a heap
on the floor.
 Careful– you nearly squashed me.
 Rincewind struggled to his elbows and reached into the pocket of his robe. When he withdrew his hand
the green frog was sitting on it, its eyes oddly luminous in the half-light.
 Yes? said Rincewind.
 Put me down on the floor and stand back.
 The frog blinked.
 The wizard did so, and dragged a bewildered Twoflower out of the way.
 The room darkened. There was a windy, roaring sound. Streamers of green, purple and octarine cloud
appeared out of nowhere and began to spiral rapidly towards the recumbent amphibian, shedding small
bolts of lightning as they whirled. Soon the frog was lost in a golden haze which began to elongate
upwards, filling the room with a warm yellow light. Within it was a darker, indistinct shape, which
wavered and changed even as they watched. And all the time there was the high, brain-curdling whine of
a huge magical field
 As suddenly as it had appeared, the magical tornado vanished. And there, occupying the space where
the frog had been, was a frog.
 Fantastic, said Rincewind.
 The frog gazed at him reproachfully.
 Really amazing, said Rincewind sourly. A frog magically transformed into a frog. Wondrous.
 Turn around, said a voice behind them. It was a soft, feminine voice, almost an inviting voice, the sort
of voice you could have a few drinks with, but it was coming from a spot where there oughtn't to be a
voice at all. They managed to turn without really moving, like a couple of statues revolving on plinths.
 There was a woman standing in the pre-dawn light. She looked - she was - she had a - in point of actual
fact she
 Later Rincewind and Twoflower couldn't quite agree on any single fact about her, except that she had
appeared to be beautiful (precisely what physical features made her beautiful they could not, definitively,
state) and that she had green eyes. Not the pale green of ordinary eyes, either these were the green of
fresh emeralds and as iridescent as a dragonfly. And one of the few genuinely magical facts that
Rincewind knew was that no god or goddess, contrary and volatile as they might be in all other respects,
could change the colour or nature of their eyes
 L-he began. She raised a hand.
 You know that if you say my name I must depart, she hissed. surely you recall that I am the one
goddess who comes only when not invoked?
 Uh. Yes, I suppose I do, croaked the wizard, trying not to look at the eyes. You're the one they call
the Lady?
 Yes.
 Are you a goddess then? said Twoflower excitedly. I've always wanted to meet one.
 Rincewind tensed, waiting for the explosion of rage. Instead, the Lady merely smiled.
 Your friend the wizard should introduce us, she said.
 Rincewind coughed. Uh, yar, he said. This is Twoflower, Lady, he's a tourist-
 –I have attended him on a number of occasions–
 And, Twoflower, this is the Lady. Just the Lady, right? Nothing else. Don't try and give her any other
name, okay? he went on desperately, his eyes darting meaningful glances that were totally lost on the
little man.
 Rincewind shivered. He was not, of course, an atheist; on the Disc the gods dealt severely with atheists.
On the few occasions when he had some spare change he had always made a point of dropping a few
coppers into a temple coffer somewhere, on the principle that a man needed all the friends he could get.
But usually he didn't bother the Gods, and he hoped the Gods wouldn't bother him. Life was quite
complicated enough.
 There were two gods, however, who were really terrifying. The rest of the gods were usually only sort of
large-scale humans, fond of wine and war and whoring. But Fate and the Lady were chilling.
 In the Gods' Quarter, in Ankh-Morpork, Fate had a small, heavy, leaden temple, where hollow-eyed
and gaunt worshippers met on dark nights for their predestined-and fairly pointless rites. There were no
temples at all to the Lady, although she was arguably the most powerful goddess in the entire history of
Creation. A few of the more daring members of the Gamblers' Guild had once experimented with a form
of worship, in the deepest cellars of Guild headquarters, and had all died of penury, murder or just Death
within the week. She was the Goddess Who Must Not Be Named; those who sought her never found
her, yet she was known to come to the aid of those in greatest need. And, then again, sometimes she
didn't. She was like that. She didn't like the clicking of rosaries, but was attracted to the sound of dice.
No man knew what She looked like, although there were many times when a man who was gambling his
life on the turn of the cards would pick up the hand he had been dealt and stare Her full in the face. Of
course, sometimes he didn't. Among all the gods she was at one and the same time the most courted and
the most cursed.
 We don't have gods where I come from, said Twoflower.
 You do, you know, said the Lady.Everyone has gods. You just don't think they're gods.
 Rincewind shook himself mentally.
 Look, he said. I don't want to sound impatient, but in a few minutes some people are going to come
through that door and take us away and kill us.
 Yes, said the Lady.
 I suppose you wouldn't tell us why? said Twoflower.
 Yes, said the Lady. The Krullians intend to launch a bronze vessel over the edge of the Disc. Their
prime purpose is to learn the sex of A'tuin the World Turtle.
 Seems rather pointless, said Rincewind.
 No. Consider. One day Great A'tuin may encounter another member of the species chelys galactica,
somewhere in the vast night in which we move. Will they fight? Will they mate? A little imagination will
show you that the sex of Great A'tuin could be very important to us. At least, so the Krullians say.
 Rincewind tried not to think of World Turtles mating. It wasn't completely easy.
 So, continued the goddess, they intend to launch this ship of space, with two voyagers aboard. It will
be the culmination of decades of research. It will also be very dangerous for the travellers. And so, in an
attempt to reduce the risks, the Arch-astronomer of Krull has bargained with Fate to sacrifice two men at
the moment of launch. Fate, in His turn, has agreed to smile on the space ship. A neat barter, is it not?
 And we're the sacrifices, said Rincewind.
 Yes.
 I thought Fate didn't go in for that sort of bargaining. I thought Fate was implacable, said Rincewind.
 Normally, yes. But you two have been thorns in his side for some time. He specified that the sacrifices
should be you. He allowed you to escape from the pirates. He allowed you to drift into the Circumfence.
Fate can be one mean god at times.
 There was a pause. The frog sighed and wandered off under the table.
 But you can help us? prompted Twoflower.
 You amuse me, said the Lady. I have a sentimental streak. You'd know that, if you were gamblers.
So for a little while I rode in a frog's mind and you kindly rescued me, for, as we all know, no-one likes
to see pathetic and helpless creatures swept to their death.
 Thank you, said Rincewind.
 The whole mind of Fate is bent against you, said the Lady. But all I can do is give you one chance.
Just one, small chance. The rest is up to you.
 She vanished.
 Gosh, said Twoflower, after a while. That's the first time I've ever seen a goddess.
 The door swung open. Garhartra entered, holding a wand in front of him. Behind him were two guards,
armed more conventionally with swords.
 Ah, he said conversationally. You are ready, I see.
 Ready, said a voice inside Rincewind's head.
 The bottle that the wizard had flung some eight hours earlier had been hanging in the air, imprisoned by
magic in its own personal time-field. But during all those hours the original mana of the spell had been
slowly leaking away until the total magical energy was no longer sufficient to hold it against the Universe's
own powerful normality field, and when that happened Reality snapped back in a matter of
microseconds. The visible sign of this was that the bottle suddenly completed the last part of its parabola
and burst against the side of the Guestmaster's head, showering the guards with glass and jellyfish wine.
 Rincewind grabbed Twoflower's arm, kicked the nearest guard in the groin, and dragged the startled
tourist into the corridor. Before the stunned Garhartra had sunk to the floor his two guests were already
pounding across distant flagstones.
 Rincewind skidded around a corner and found himself on a balcony that ran around the four sides of a
courtyard. Below them, most of the floor of the yard was taken up by an ornamental pond in which a few
terrapins sunbathed among the lily leaves.
 And ahead of Rincewind were a couple of very surprised wizards wearing the distinctive dark blue and
black robes of trained hydrophobes. One of them, quicker on the uptake than his companion, raised a
hand and began the first words of a spell.
 There was a short sharp noise by Rincewind's side. Twoflower had spat. The hydrophobe screamed
and dropped his hand as though it had been stung.
 The other didn't have time to move before Rincewind was on him, fists swinging wildly. One stiff punch
with the weight of terror behind it sent the man tumbling over the balcony rail and into the pond, which
did a very strange thing; the water smacked aside as though a large invisible balloon had been dropped
into it, and the hydrophobe hung screaming in his own revulsion field.
 Twoflower watched him in amazement until Rincewind snatched at his shoulder and indicated a likely
looking passage. They hurried down it, leaving the remaining hydrophobe writhing on the floor and
snatching at his damp hand. For a while there was some shouting behind them, but they scuttled along a
cross corridor and another courtyard and soon left the sounds of pursuit behind. Finally Rincewind
picked a safe looking door, peered around it, found the room beyond to be unoccupied, dragged
Twoflower inside, and slammed it behind him. Then he leaned against it, wheezing horribly.
 We're totally lost in a palace on an island we haven't a hope of leaving, he panted. And what's more
we– hey! he finished, as the sight of the contents of the room filtered up his deranged optic nerves.
 Twoflower was already staring at the walls.
 Because what was so odd about the room was, it contained the whole Universe.

 Death sat in His garden, running a whetstone along the edge of His scythe. It was already so sharp that
any passing breeze that blew across it was sliced smoothly into two puzzled zephyrs, although breezes
were rare indeed in Death's silent garden. It lay on a sheltered plateau overlooking the Disc world's
complex dimensions, and behind it loomed the cold, still, immensely high and brooding mountains of
Eternity.
 Swish! went the stone. Death hummed a dirge, and tapped one bony foot on the frosty flagstones.
 Someone approached through the dim orchard where the nightapples grew, and there came the sickly
sweet smell of crushed lilies. Death looked up angrily, and found Himself staring into eyes that were black
as the inside of a cat and full of distant stars that had no counterpart among the familiar constellations of
the Realtime universe.
 Death and Fate looked at each other. Death grinned - He had no alternative, of course, being made of
implacable bone. The whetstone sang rhythmically along the blade as He continued His task.
 I have a task for you, said Fate. His words drifted across death's scythe and split tidily into two
ribbons of consonants and vowels.
 I HAVE TASKS ENOUGH THIS DAY, said Death in a voice as heavy as neutronium, THE WHITE
PLAGUE ABIDES EVEN NOW IN PSEUDOPOLIS AND I AM BOUND THERE TO RESCUE
MANY OF ITS CITIZENS FROM HIS GRASP. SUCH A ONE HAS NOT BEEN SEEN THESE
HUNDRED YEARS. I AM EXPECTED TO STALK THE STREETS, AS IS MY DUTY.
 I refer to the matter of the little wanderer and the rogue wizard, said Fate softly, seating himself beside
Death's black-robed form and staring down at the,distant, multifaceted jewel which was the Disc
universe as seen from this extra-dimensional vantage point.
 The scythe ceased its song.
 They die in a few hours, said Fate. It is fated.
 Death stirred, and the stone began to move again.
 I thought you would be pleased, said Fate.
 Death shrugged, a particularly expressive gesture for someone whose visible shape was that of a
skeleton.
 I DID INDEED CHASE THEM MIGHTILY. ONCE, he said, BUT AT LAST THE THOUGHT
CAME TO ME THAT SOONER OR LATER ALL MEN MUST DIE. EVERYTHING DIES IN
THE END. I CAN BE ROBBED BUT NEVER DENIED, I TOLD MYSELF. WHY WORRY?
 I too cannot be cheated, snapped Fate.
 SO I HAVE HEARD, said Death, still grinning.
 Enough! shouted Fate, jumping to his feet. They will die! He vanished in a sheet of blue fire.
 Death nodded to Himself and continued at His work. After some minutes the edge of the blade seemed
to be finished to His satisfaction. He stood up and levelled the scythe at the fat and noisome candle that
burned on the edge of the bench and then, with two deft sweeps, cut the flame into three bright slivers.
Death grinned.
 A short while later he was saddling his white stallion, which lived in a stable at the back of Death's
cottage. The beast snuffled at him in a friendly fashion; though it was crimson-eyed and had flanks like
oiled silk, it was nevertheless a real flesh-and-blood horse and, indeed, was in all probability better
treated than most beasts of burden on the Disc. Death was not an unkind master. He weighed very little
and, although He often rode back with His saddlebags bulging, they weighed nothing whatsoever.

 All those worlds! said Twoflower. It's fantastic!
 Rincewind grunted, and continued to prowl warily around the star-filled room. Twoflower turned to a
complicated astrolabe, in the centre of which was the entire Great A'Tuin-Elephant-Disc system wrought
in brass and picked out with tiny jewels. Around it stars and planets wheeled on fine silver wires.
 Fantastic! he said again. On the walls around him constellations made of tiny phosphorescent seed
pearls had been picked out on vast tapestries made of jet-black velvet, giving the room's occupants the
impression of floating in the interstellar gulf. Various easels held huge sketches of Great A'Tuin as viewed
from various parts of the Circumfence, with every mighty scale and cratered pock-mark meticulously
marked in. Twoflower stared about him with a faraway look in his eyes.
 Rincewind was deeply troubled. What troubled him most of all were the two suits that hung from
supports in the centre of the room. He circled them uneasily.
 They appeared to be made of fine white leather, hung about with straps and brass nozzles and other
highly unfamiliar and suspicious contrivances. The leggings ended in high, thick-soled boots, and the arms
were shoved into big supple gauntlets. Strangest of all were the big copper helmets that were obviously
supposed to fit on heavy collars around the neck of the suits. The helmets were almost certainly useless
for protection a light sword would have no difficulty in splitting them, even if it didn't hit the ridiculous little
glass windows in the front. Each helmet had a crest of white feathers on top, which went absolutely no
way at all towards improving their overall appearance.
 Rincewind was beginning to have the glimmerings of a suspicion about those suits.
 In front of them .was a table covered with celestial charts and scraps of parchment covered with figures.
Whoever would be wearing those suits, Rincewind decided, was expecting to boldly go where no man -
other than the occasional luckless sailor, who didn't really count - had boldly gone before, and he was
now beginning to get not just a suspicion but a horrible premonition.
 He turned round and found Twoflower looking at him with a speculative expression.
 No– began Rincewind, urgently. Twoflower ignored him.
 The goddess said two men were going to be sent over the Edge, he said, his eyes gleaming, and you
remember Tethis the troll saying you'd need some kind of protection? The Krullians have got over that.
These are suits of space armour.
 They don't look very roomy to me, said Rincewind hurriedly, and grabbed the tourist by the arm, so if
you'd just come on, no sense in staying here-
 Why must you always panic? asked Twoflower petulantly.
 Because the whole of my future life just flashed in front of my eyes, and it didn't take very long, and if
you don't move now I'm going to leave without you because any second now you're going to suggest that
we put on-
 The door opened.
 Two husky young men stepped into the room. All they were wearing was a pair of woollen pants apiece.
One of them was still towelling himself briskly. They both nodded at the two escapees with no apparent
surprise.
 The taller of the two men sat down on one of the benches in front of the seats. He beckoned to
Rincewind, and said
 ?Tyo yur atl ho sooten gatrunen?
 And this was awkward, because although Rincewind considered himself an expert in most of the tongues
of the western segments of the Disc it was the first time that he had ever been addressed in Krullian, and
he did not understand one word of it. Neither did Twoflower, but that did not stop him stepping forward
and taking a breath.
 The speed of light through a magical aura such as the one that surrounded the Disc was quite slow, being
not much faster than the speed of sound in less highly-tuned universes. But it was still the fastest thing
around with the exception, in moments like this, of Rincewind's mind.
 In an instant he became aware that the tourist was about to try his own peculiar brand of linguistics,
which meant that he would speak loudly and slowly in his own language.
 Rincewind's elbow shot back, knocking the breath from Twoflower's body. When the little man looked
up in pain and astonishment Rincewind caught his eye and pulled an imaginary tongue out of his mouth
and cut it with an imaginary pair of scissors.
 The second chelonaut- for such was the profession of the men whose fate it would shortly be to voyage
to Great A'Tuin - looked up from the chart table and watched this in puzzlement. His big heroic brow
wrinkled with the effort of speech.
 ?Hor yu latruin nor u? he said.
 Rincewind smiled and nodded and pushed Twoflower in his general direction. With an inward sigh of
relief he saw the tourist pay sudden attention to a big brass telescope that lay on the table.
 ! Sooten u! commanded the seated chelonaut. Rincewind nodded and smiled and took one of the big
copper helmets from the rack and brought it down on the man's head as hard as he possibly could. The
chelonaut fell forward with a soft grunt.
 The other man took one startled step before Twoflower hit him amateurishly but effectively with the
telescope. He crumpled on top of his colleague.
 Rincewind and Twoflower looked at each other over the carnage.
 All right! snapped Rincewind, aware that he had lost some kind of contest but not entirely certain what
it was. Don't bother to say it. Someone out there is expecting these two guys to come out in the suits in a
minute. I suppose they thought we were slaves. Help me hide these behind the drapes and then, and
then-
 –e'd better suit up, said Twoflower, picking up the second helmet.
 Yes, said Rincewind. You know, as soon as I saw the suits I just knew I'd end up wearing one. Don't
ask me how I knew - I suppose it was because it was just about the worst possible thing that was likely
to happen.
 Well, you said yourself we have no way of escaping, said Twoflower, his voice muffled as he pulled
the top half of a suit over his head. Anything's better than being sacrificed.
 As soon as we get a chance we run for it, said Rincewind. Don't get any ideas.
 He thrust an arm savagely into his suit and banged his head on the helmet. He reflected briefly that
someone up there was watching over him.
 Thanks a lot, he said bitterly.

 At the very edge of the city and country of Krull was a large semicircular amphitheatre, with seating for
several tens of thousands of people. The arena was only semi-circular for the very elegant reason that it
overlooked the cloud sea that boiled up from the Rimfall, far below, and now every seat was occupied.
And the crowd was growing restive. It had come to see a double sacrifice and also the launching of the
great bronze space ship. Neither event had yet materialised.
 The Arch-astronomer beckoned the Master Launchcontroller to him.
 Well? he said, filling a mere four letters with a full lexicon of anger and menace. The Master
Launchcontroller went pale.
 No news, lord, said the Launchcontroller, and added with a brittle brightness, except that your
prominence will be pleased to hear that Garhartra has recovered.
 That is a fact he may come to regret, said the Arch-astronomer.
 Yes, lord.
 How much longer do we have?
 The Launchcontroller glanced at the rapidly-climbing sun.
 Thirty minutes, your prominence. After that Krull will have revolved away from Great A'Tuin's tail and
the Potent Voyager will be doomed to spin away into the interterrapene gulf. I have already set the
automatic controls, so-
 All right, all right, the Arch-astronomer said, waving him away. The launch must go ahead. Maintain
the watch on the harbour, of course. When the wretched pair are caught I will personally take a great
deal of pleasure in executing them myself.
 Yes, lord. Er-
 The Arch-astronomer frowned. What else have you got to say, man?
 The Launchcontroller swallowed. All this was very unfair on him, he was a practical magician rather than
a diplomat, and that was why some wiser brains had seen to it that he would be the one to pass on the
news.
 A monster has come out of the sea and it's attacking the ships in the harbour, he said. A runner just
arrived from there.
 A big monster? said the Arch-astronomer.
 Not particularly, although it is said to be exceptionally fierce, lord.
 The ruler of Krull and the Circumfence considered this for a moment, then shrugged.
 The sea is full of monsters, he said. It is one of its prime attributes. Have it dealt with. And–Master
Launchcontroller?
 Lord?
 If I am further vexed, you will recall that two people are due to be sacrificed. I may feel generous and
increase the number.
 Yes, lord. The Master Launchcontroller scuttled away, relieved to be out of the autocrat's sight.
 The Potent Voyager, no longer the blank bronze shell that had been smashed from the mould a few days
earlier, rested in its cradle on top of a wooden tower in the centre of the arena. In front of it a railway ran
down towards the Edge, where for the space of a few yards it turned suddenly upwards.
 The late Dactylos Goldeneyes, who had designed the launching pad as well as the Potent Voyager itself,
had claimed that this last touch was merely to ensure that the ship would not snag on any rocks as it
began its long plunge. Maybe it was merely coincidental that it would also, because of that little twitch in
the track, leap like a salmon and shine theatrically in the sunlight before disappearing into the cloud sea.
 There was a fanfare of trumpets at the edge of the arena. The chelonauts' honour guard appeared, to
much cheering from the crowd. Then the whitesuited explorers themselves stepped out into the light.
 It immediately dawned on the Arch-astronomer that something was wrong. Heroes always walked in a
certain way, for example. They certainly didn't waddle, and one of the chelonauts was definitely
waddling.
 The roar of the assembled people of Krull was deafening. As the chelonauts and their guards crossed
the great arena, passing between the many altars that had been set up for the various wizards and priests
of Krull's many sects to ensure the success of the launch, the Arch-astronomer frowned. By the time the
party was halfway across the floor his mind had reached a conclusion. By the time the chelonauts were
standing at the foot of the ladder that led to the ship- and was there more than a hint of reluctance about
them? - the Arch-astronomer was on his feet, his words lost in the noise of the crowd. One of his arms
shot out and back fingers spread dramatically in the traditional spell-casting position, and any passing
lip-reader who was also familiar with the standard texts on magic would have recognized the opening
words of Vestcake's Floating Curse, and would then have prudently run away.
 Its final words remained unsaid, however. The Arch-astronomer turned in astonishment as a commotion
broke out around the big arched entrance to the arena. Guards were running out into the daylight,
throwing down their weapons as they scuttled among the altars or vaulted the parapet into the stands.
 Something emerged behind them, and the crowd around the entrance ceased its raucous cheering and
began a silent, determined scramble to get out of the way.
 The something was a low dome of seaweed, moving slowly but with a sinister sense of purpose. One
guard overcame his horror sufficiently to stand in its path and hurl his spear, which landed squarely
among the weeds. The crowd cheered then went deathly silent as the dome surged forward and engulfed
the man completely.
 The Arch-astronomer dismissed the half-formed shape of Vestcake's famous Curse with a sharp wave
of his hand, and quickly spoke the words of one of the most powerful spells in his repertoire the Infernal
Combustion Enigma.
 Octarine fire spiralled around and between his fingers as he shaped the complex rune of the spell in
mid-air and sent it, screaming and trailing blue smoke, towards the shape.
 There was a satisfying explosion and a gout of flame shot up into the clear morning sky, shedding flakes
of burning seaweed on the way. A cloud of smoke and steam concealed the monster for several minutes,
and when it cleared the dome had completely disappeared.
 There was a large charred circle on the flagstones, however, in which a few clumps of kelp and
bladderwrack still smouldered.
 And in the centre of the circle was a perfectly ordinary, if somewhat large, wooden chest. It was not
even scorched. Someone on the far side of the arena started to laugh, but the sound was broken off
abruptly as the chest rose up on dozens of what could only be legs and turned to face the
Arch-astronomer. A perfectly ordinary if somewhat large wooden chest does not, of course, have a face
with which to face, but this one was quite definitely facing. In precisely the same way as he understood
that, the Arch-astronomer was also horribly aware that this perfectly normal box was in some
indescribable way narrowing its eyes.
 It began to move resolutely towards him. He shuddered.
 Magicians! he screamed. Where are my magicians?
 Around the arena pale-faced men peeped out from behind altars and under benches. One of the bolder
ones, seeing the expression on the Arch-astronomer's face, raised an arm tremulously and essayed a
hasty thunderbolt. It hissed towards the chest and struck it squarely in a shower of white sparks.
 That was the signal for every magician, enchanter and thaumaturgist in Krull to leap up eagerly and,
under the terrified eyes of their master, unleash the first spell that came to each desperate mind. Charms
curved and whistled through the air.
 Soon the chest was lost to view again in an expanding cloud of magical particles, which billowed out and
wreathed it in twisting, disquieting shapes. Spell after spell screamed into the melee. Flame and lightning
bolts of all eight colours stabbed out brightly from the seething thing that now occupied the space where
the box had been.
 Not since the Mage Wars had so much magic been concentrated on one small area. The air itself
wavered and glittered. Spell ricocheted off spell, creating short-lived wild spells whose brief half-life was
both weird and uncontrolled. The stones under the heaving mass began to buckle and split. One of them
in fact turned into something best left undescribed and slunk off into some dismal dimension. Other
strange side-effects began to manifest themselves. A shower of small lead cubes bounced out of the
storm and rolled across the heaving floor, and eldritch shapes gibbered and beckoned obscenely;
four-sided triangles and double-ended circles existed momentarily before merging again into the booming,
screaming tower of runaway raw magic that boiled up from the molten flagstones and spread out over
Krull. It no longer mattered that most of the magicians had ceased their spell casting and fled - the thing
was now feeding on the stream of octarine particles that were always at their thickest near the Edge of
the Disc. Throughout the island of Krull every magical activity failed as all the available mana in the area
was sucked into the cloud, which was already a quarter of a mile high and streaming out into
mind-curdling shapes; hydrophobes on their seaskimming lenses crashed screaming into the waves, magic
potions turned to mere impure water in their phials, magic swords melted and dripped from their
scabbards.
 But none of this in any way prevented the thing at the base of the cloud, now gleaming mirrorbright in the
intensity of the power storm around it, from moving at a steady walking pace towards the
Arch-astronomer.
 Rincewind and Twoflower watched in awe from the shelter of Potent Voyager's launch tower. The
honour party had long since vanished, leaving their weapons scattered behind them.
 Well, sighed Twoflower at last, there goes the Luggage. He sighed.
 Don't you believe it, said Rincewind. sapient pearwood is totally impervious to all known forms of
magic. It's been constructed to follow you anywhere. I mean, when you die, if you go to Heaven, you'll at
least have a clean pair of socks in the afterlife. But I don't want to die yet, so let's just get going, shall
we?
 Where? said Twoflower.
 Rincewind picked up a crossbow and a handful of quarrels. Anywhere that isn't here, he said.
 What about the Luggage?
 Don't worry. When the storm has used up all the free magic in the vicinity it'll just die out.
 In fact that was already beginning to happen. The billowing cloud was still flowing up from the area but
now it had a tenuous, harmless look about it. Even as Twoflower stared, it began to flicker uncertainly.
 Soon it was a pale ghost. The luggage was now visible as a squat shape among the almost invisible
flames. Around it the rapidly cooling stones began to crack and buckle.
 Twoflower called softly to his luggage. It stopped its stolid progression across the tortured flags and
appeared to be listening intently; then, moving its dozens of feet in an intricate pattern, it turned on its
length and headed towards the Potent Voyager. Rincewind watched it sourly. The Luggage had an
elemental nature, absolutely no brain, a homicidal attitude towards anything that threatened its master,
and he wasn't quite sure that its inside occupied the same space-time framework as its outside.
 Not a mark on it, said Twoflower cheerfully, as the box settled down in front of him. He pushed open
the lid.
 This is a fine time to change your underwear, snarled Rincewind. In a minute all those guards and
priests are going to come back, and they're going to be upset, man!
 Water, murmured Twoflower. The whole box is full of water!
 Rincewind peered over his shoulder. There was no sign of clothes, moneybags, or any other of the
tourist's belongings. The whole box was full of water.
 A wave sprang up from nowhere and lapped over the edge. It hit the flagstones but, instead of spreading
out, began to take the shape of-a foot. Another foot and the bottom half of a pair of legs followed as
more water streamed down as if filling an invisible mould. A moment later Tethis the sea troll was
standing in front of them, blinking.
 I see, he said at last. You two. I suppose I shouldn't be surprised.
 He looked around, ignoring their astonished expressions.
 I was just sitting outside my hut, watching the sun set, when this thing came roaring up out of the water
and swallowed me, he said. I thought it was rather strange. Where is this place?
 Krull, said Rincewind. He stared hard at the now closed luggage, which was managing to project a
smug expression. Swallowing people was something it did quite frequently, but always when the lid was
next opened there was nothing inside but Twoflower's laundry. Savagely he wrenched the lid up. There
was nothing inside but Twoflower's laundry. It was perfectly dry.
 Well, well, said Tethis. He looked up.
 Hey! he said. Isn't this the ship they're going to send over the Edge? Isn't it? It must be!
 An arrow zipped through his chest, leaving a faint ripple. He didn't appear to notice. Rincewind did.
Soldiers were beginning to appear at the edge of the arena, and a number of them were peering around
the entrances.
 Another arrow bounced off the tower behind Twoflower. At this range the bolts did not have a lot of
force, but it would only be a matter of time
 Quick! said Twoflower. Into the ship! They won't dare fire at that!
 I knew you were going to suggest that, groaned Rincewind. I just knew it!
 He aimed a kick at the Luggage. It backed off a few inches, and opened its lid threateningly.
 A spear arced out of the sky and trembled to a halt in the woodwork by the wizard's ear. He screamed
briefly and scrambled up the ladder after the others.
 Arrows whistled around them as they came out on to the narrow catwalk that led along the spine of the
Potent Voyager. Twoflower led the way, jogging along with what Rincewind considered to be too much
suppressed excitement.
 Atop the centre of the ship was a large round bronze hatch with hasps around it. The troll and the tourist
knelt down and started to work on them.

 In the heart of the Potent Voyager fine sand had been trickling into a carefully designed cup for several
hours. Now the cup was filled by exactly the right amount to dip down and upset a carefully-balanced
weight. The weight swung away, pulling a pin from an intricate little mechanism. A chain began to move.
There was a clonk

 What was that? said Rincewind urgently. He looked down.
 The hail of arrows had stopped. The crowd of priests and soldiers were standing motionless, staring
intently at the ship. A small worried man elbowed his way through them and started to shout something.
 What was what? said Twoflower, busy with a wing-nut.
 I thought I heard something, said Rincewind.
 Look, he said, we'll threaten to damage the thing if they don't let us go, right? That's all we're going to
do, right?
 Yah, said Twoflower vaguely. He sat back on his heels. That's it, he said. It ought to lift off now.
 Several muscular men were swarming up the ladder to the ship. Rincewind recognized the two
chelonauts among them. They were carrying swords.
 I- he began.
 The ship lurched. Then, with infinite slowness, it began to move along the rails.
 In that moment of black horror Rincewind saw that Twoflower and the troll had managed to pull the
hatch up. A metal ladder inside led into the cabin below. The troll disappeared.
 We've got to get off, whispered Rincewind.
 Twoflower looked at him, a strange mad smile on his face. Stars, said the tourist. Worlds. The whole
damn sky full of worlds. Places no-one will ever see. Except me. He stepped through the hatchway.
 You're totally mad, said Rincewind hoarsely, trying to keep his balance as the ship began to speed up.
He turned as one of the chelonauts tried to leap the gap between the Voyager and the tower, landed on
the curving flank of the ship, scrabbled for an instant for purchase, failed to find any, and dropped away
with a shriek.
 The Voyager was travelling quite fast now. Rincewind could see past Twoflower's head to the sunlit
cloud sea and the impossible Rimbow, floating tantalisingly beyond it, beckoning fools to venture too
far
 He also saw a gang of men climbing desperately over the lower slopes of the launching ramp and
manhandling a large baulk of timber on to the track, in a frantic attempt to derail the ship before it
vanished over the Edge. The wheels slammed into it, but the only effect was to make the ship rock,
Twoflower to lose his grip on the ladder and fall into the cabin, and the hatch to slam down with the
horrible sound of a dozen fiddly little catches snapping into place. Rincewind dived forward and
scrabbled at them, whimpering.
 The cloud sea was much nearer now. The Edge itself, a rocky perimeter to the arena, was startlingly
close.
 Rincewind stood up. There was only one thing to do now, and he did it. He panicked blindly, just as the
ship's bogeys hit the little upgrade and flung it sparkling like a salmon, into the sky and over the Edge.
 A few seconds later there was a thunder of little feet and the Luggage cleared the rim of the world, legs
still pumping determinedly, and plunged down into the Universe.

 THE END

 Rincewind woke up and shivered. He was freezing cold.
 So this is it, he thought. When you die you go to a cold, damp, misty freezing place. Hades, where the
mournful spirits of the Dead troop forever across the sorrowful marshes, corpse-lights flickering fit fully in
the encircling–hang on a minute
 Surely Hades wasn't this uncomfortable? And he was very uncomfortable indeed. His back ached where
a branch was pressing into it, his legs and arms hurt where the twigs had lacerated them and, judging by
the way his head was feeling, something hard had recently hit it. If this was Hades it sure was hell-hang
on a minute
 Tree. He concentrated on the word that floated up from his mind, although the buzzing in his ears and the
flashing lights in front of his eyes made this an unexpected achievement. Tree. Wooden thing. That was it.
Branches and twigs and things. And Rincewind, lying in it. Tree. Dripping wet. Cold white cloud all
around. Underneath, too. Now that was odd.
 He was alive and lying covered in bruises in a small thorn tree that was growing in a crevice in a rock
that projected out of the foaming white wall that was the Rimfall. The realization hit him in much the same
way as an icy hammer. He shuddered. The tree gave a warning creak.
 Something blue and blurred shot past him, dipped briefly into the thundering waters, and whirred back
and settled on a branch near Rincewind's head. It was a small bird with a tuft of blue and green feathers.
It swallowed the little silver fish that it had snatched from the Fall and eyed him curiously.
 Rincewind became aware that there were lots of similar birds around.
 They hovered, darted and swooped easily across the face of the water, and every so often one would
raise an extra plume of spray as it stole another doomed morsel from the waterfall. Several of them were
perching in the tree. They were as iridescent as jewels. Rincewind was entranced.
 He was in fact the first man ever to see the rimfishers, the tiny creatures who had long ago evolved a
lifestyle quite unique even for the Disc. long before the Krullians had built the Circumfence the rimfishers
had devised their own efficient method of policing the edge of the world for a living.
 They didn't seem bothered about Rincewind. He had a brief but chilling vision of himself living the rest of
his life out in this tree, subsisting on raw birds and such fish as he could snatch as they plummeted past.
 The tree moved distinctly. Rincewind gave a whimper as he found himself sliding backwards, but
managed to grab a branch. Only, sooner or later, he would fall asleep
 There was a subtle change of scene, a slight purplish tint to the sky. A tall, black-cloaked figure was
standing on the air next to the tree. It had a scythe in one hand. Its face was hidden in the shadows of the
hood.
 I HAVE COME FOR THEE, said the invisible mouth, in tones as heavy as a whale's heartbeat.
 The trunk of the tree gave another protesting creak, and a pebble bounced off Rincewind's helmet as
one root tore loose from the rock.
 Death Himself always came in person to harvest the souls of wizards.
 What am I going to die of? said Rincewind.
 The tall figure hesitated.
 PARDON? it said.
 Well, I haven't broken anything, and I haven't drowned, so what am I about to die of? You can't just be
killed by Death; there has to be a reason, said Rincewind.
 To his utter amazement he didn't feel terrified any more. For about the first time in his life he wasn't
frightened. Pity the experience didn't look like lasting for long.
 Death appeared to reach a conclusion.
 YOU COULD DIE OF TERROR, the hood intoned. The voice still had its graveyard ring, but there
was a slight tremor of uncertainty.
 Won't work, said Rincewind smugly.
 THERE DOESN'T HAVE TO BE A REASON, said Death, I CAN JUST KILL YOU.
 Hey, you can't do that! It'd be murder!
 The cowled figure sighed and pulled back its hood. Instead of the grinning death's head that Rincewind
had been expecting he found himself looking up into the pale and slightly transparent face of a rather
worried demon, of sorts.
 I'm making rather a mess of this, aren't I? it said wearily.
 You're not Death! Who are you? cried Rincewind.
 Scrofula.
 Scrofula?
 Death couldn't come, said the demon wretchedly. There's a big plague on in Pseudopolis. He had to
go and stalk the streets. So he sent me.
 No-one dies of scrofula! I've got rights. I'm a wizard!
 All right, all right. This was going to be my big chance, said Scrofula, but look at it this way - if I hit
you with this scythe you'll be just as dead as you would be if Death had done it. Who'd know?
 I'd know! snapped Rincewind.
 You wouldn't. You'd be dead, said Scrofula logically.
 Piss off, said Rincewind.
 That's all very well, said the demon, hefting the scythe, but why not try to see things from my point of
view? This means a lot to me, and you've got to admit that your life isn't all that wonderful. Reincarnation
can only be an improvement- uh.
 His hand flew to his mouth but Rincewind was already pointing a trembling finger at him.
 Reincarnation! he said excitedly. So it is true what the mystics say!
 I'm admitting nothing, said Scrofula testily. It was a slip of the tongue. Now–are you going to die
willingly or not?
 No, said Rincewind.
 Please yourself, replied the demon. He raised the scythe. It whistled down in quite a professional way,
but Rincewind wasn't there. He was in fact several metres below, and the distance was increasing all the
time, because the branch had chosen that moment to snap and send him on his interrupted journey
towards the interstellar gulf.
 Come back! screamed the demon.
 Rincewind didn't answer. He was lying belly down in the rushing air, staring down into the clouds that
even now were thinning.
 They vanished.
 Below, the whole Universe twinkled at Rincewind. There was Great A'Tuin, huge and ponderous and
pocked with craters. There was the little Disc moon. There was a distant gleam that could only be the
Potent Voyager. And there were all the stars, looking remarkably like powdered diamonds spilled on
black velvet, the stars that lured and ultimately called the boldest towards them
 The whole of Creation was waiting for Rincewind to drop in. He did so. There didn't seem to be any
alternative.

 The shape and cosmology of the disc system are perhaps worthy of note at this point. There are, of
course, two major directions on the disc Hubward and Rimward. But since the disc itself revolves at the
rate of once every eight hundred days (in order to distribute the weight fairly upon its supportive
pachyderms, according to Reforgule of Krull) there are also two lesser directions, which are Turnwise
and Widdershins. Since the disc's tiny orbiting sunlet maintains a fixed orbit while the majestic disc turns
slowly beneath it, it will be readily deduced that a disc year consists of not four but eight seasons. The
summers are those times when the sun rises or sets at the nearest point on the Rim, the winters those
occasions when it rises or sets at a point around ninety degrees along the circumference. Thus, in the
lands around the Circle Sea, the year begins on Hogs' Watch Night, progresses through a Spring Prime
to its first midsummer (Small Gods' Eve) which is followed by Autumn Prime and, straddling the half-year
point of Crueltide, Winter Secundus (also known as the Spindlewinter, since at this time the sun rises in
the direction of spin). Then comes Secundus Spring with Summer Two on its heels, the three quarter
mark of the year being the night of Alls Fallow - the one night of the year, according to legend, when
witches and warlocks stay in bed. Then drifting leaves and frosty nights drag on towards
Backspindlewinter and a new Hogs' Watch Night nestling like a frozen jewel at its heart.
 Since the Hub is never closely warmed by the weak sun the lands there are locked in permafrost. The
Rim, on the other hand, is a region of sunny islands and balmy days. There are, of course, eight days in a
disc week and eight colours in its light spectrum. Eight is a number of some considerable occult
significance on the disc and must never, ever, be spoken by a wizard.
 Precisely why all the above should be so is not clear, but goes some way to explain why, on the disc, the
Gods are not so much worshipped as blamed.

There has been a war between
orcs and humans
for as long as
can be remembered.
But there was once a time,
when we did not even know
who our enemy was.
Or what that evil green magic,
the fel, had done to us.
But in the beginning,
how could we have known.
What choice did we have?
Our world was dying.
And I had to find my clan
a new home.
Durotan.
I can feel your eyes.
I thought you were asleep.
I was.
Dreaming of a hunt,
through the snow.
I thought of a name.
Well.
Keep it to yourself, wife.
I'll choose a name
when I meet him.
Or her.
Oh.
And how will the great
Durotan name his son?
If I do not travel with him.
A son?
Can you hide your fat belly?
Better than you can
hide your fat head.
So many clans from one place, Orgrim.
Laughing skull.
Black rock.
All have been summoned.
It will be a mighty warband.
I just wonder
who's left to fight?
Lok'tar ogar!
(Victory or death!)
Victory or death!
Black rock, over there.
How much longer, Blackhand?
We are ready, Gul'dan.
Help me.
My child.
Please let him go.
I beg you.
What did she say?
She begs for you
to free her child.
But I need him.
I need all of them.
Move, half breed.
What is that?
Gul'dan's magic.
The fuel of my magic is life.
We only have enough prisoners to
send through our strongest warriors.
But that will be enough.
The enemy is weak.
When we arrive,
we will take them as fuel.
We will build a new portal.
And when it is complete,
we will bring through all...
of the Horde.
Let me go first.
For the Horde!
With child?
You dare bring that burden
into my war band!
Let me go, Blackhand.
Draka!
Push, little one.
Push.
My son.
A new warrior for the Horde.
WARCRAF Ironforge
Lothar, come.
I have got something for you.
What is it?
A mechanical marvel.
It's a boom stick.
Odd.
Take water.
You might want to
head home, big man.
Someone has attacked
one of your garrisons.
It seems your king
needs you, commander.
Stormwind
The entire garrison,
and no one saw anything.
We did find someone.
He was searching the bodies,
here, in the barracks.
In the barracks?
Finally.
Are you in command?
.
That's the mark of the Kirin Tor.
What are you doing in my city,
spell chucker?
Let me complete my examination
of the body across the hall.
Now why would I do that?
Within that body is the
secret to your attacks.
What was that?
You must summon the Guardian.
Medivh?
It should be he
who explains it.
Only the king summons the Guardian.
Get him to Goldshire.
What kind of beasts?
Rumors, your Majesty.
How does a garrison of 30 men
disappear without a whisper.
The fel.
Or at least it's influence.
Is this him?
Your Majesty.
Dad.
Thank you, son.
So who are you, mage?
My name is Khadgar.
I'm a Guardian novitiate.
I was.
I renounced my vows.
You mean you're a fugitive?
I'm not hiding.
Your Majesty.
I may have left my training but
I didn't leave my abilities behind.
I senses something.
Dark forces, when it's strong it...
almost has a smell.
Knowing that something so evil was
so close I couldn't just ignore it.
What's going on out there?
Smoke, Sir.
The southeast.
Your Majesty, I urge you to engage
the Guardian with all haste.
They've reached Elwynn Forest.
The Grand Hamlet is burning.
An attack?
What?
Stop requesting Callan.
Stay out of my business.
He wants to follow in
his father's footsteps.
My son doesn't need your help.
Tread carefully when
you talk to your queen.
You are my sister first.
When was your last visit to Karazhan?
With you.
I don't know... 6 years?
And you had no contact
with Medivh since?
Not for the lack of trying.
Well.
He can't hide from us now.
The Guardian is summoned.
Get on.
Good luck.
Okay.
Let me go!
Frostwolves do not join the hunt?
We prefer our enemies armed
with an axe, not a child.
We have been commanded, Durotan.
Respect the old ways.
There must be a worthy foe
somewhere on this dung heap.
Find them all!
Try not to kill too many,
we need them alive.
Lothar.
Moroes.
Look at you.
You haven't aged a bit.
Where is everyone?
Many things have changed.
The power that must be locked away here,
the knowledge.
Where is she?
I didn't know so many books
even existed.
Wait here.
And try not to touch anything.
He sees no one?
The world's been at peace.
Good you are here, Lothar.
It would do the Guardian
a world of good
to see a friendly face
beyond this old one.
He can't refuse you...
nor King Wrynn.
Not if he's summoned.
Chop chop.
Did you summon him, Moroes?
No.
He did not.
So.
You become a sculptor?
I'm making a golem.
It usually takes years of magic
to sip into the clay, but up here it's...
... much faster.
Makes someone to keep Moroes company.
Help to clean up around the house.
Thank you.
It's good to see you, Lothar.
We need your guidance, Medivh.
Our king summons you.
Who's the boy downstairs?
Hello?
Guardian?
Have a good look around?
Getting some ideas what you are going to
do with the place once it's yours?
Guardian, I've renounced my vow.
I didn't want to come here.
I swear, Guardian.
I urged them to find you.
I told them...
... you should be
the one to explain.
Explain what?
Fel !
In Azeroth?
In the barracks,
one of the bodies.
Guardian, what is the fel?
A magic unlike any other.
It feeds on life itself.
It pollutes the user,
twisting everything it touches.
It promises great power but
it exacts a terrible price.
There is no place for
the fel in Azeroth.
You've done the right thing.
We'll go.
Hey.
Go home, you.
Step in.
Medivh.
Your Grace.
It has been too long.
Come.
Help us get to the roots
of these troubles about.
What kind of beasts?
They are saying giants.
Armed giants.
Wolves to carry them.
Huge unstoppable monsters
What are the other kingdoms?
Are they suffering the same?
All seek our protection yet not trust
us enough to tell us anything.
We know nothing about
these so call monsters.
We need prisoners.
Even a corpse
can tell us something.
I don't know what danger
we're in, Medivh.
I exist to protect this realm, my lord.
It is my very purpose.
I am the Guardian.
At least for the time being anyhow.
Yes.
What are we going to do about...
What is his name?
Khadgar, sire.
He'll be coming with us.
Well then.
We better get going.
ELWYNN
FORES Halt!
It can't be.
What is this?
Can't tell from the look of it.
.
Guardian.
Close ranks!
Watch your back!
Victory or death!
Watch the flank to your left!
Watch your flank!
Watch your flank!
To your left!
Guardian!
Now you die, you beast!
Don't try and take them on
with brute force.
They are stronger.
Be smarter.
The fel.
They're all dying.
Only the green ones!
Kill that big bastard!
Durotan.
Move.
Guardian.
Guardian, what did you do?
I was right, wasn't I?
It's here.
Where are you going?
Get these men safely back to Stormwind.
I've to return to Karazhan.
You did well today.
Where's the Guardian?
Karazhan.
We need a prisoner.
Where's your horse?
Uh. They took my horse.
Really?
Just stay there.
How much do you
love your master?
I'll do it.
Back off!
Pity.
It would have make a good coat.
Over here!
You took it alone.
Yes.
Looks like the runt to the litter.
You.
What are you?
And why do you
attack our lands?
He does not know what you speak.
You speak our language?
Speak one more word
of their language.
And I will wear your tongue.
I will not warn you again.
Tell him to stop.
You tell him.
You're welcome.
Have you a name?
You understand our language.
Again, have you a name?
Garona.
She calls herself, Garona.
What kind of being are you?
She seems more like us
than those... beast we fought.
Orc.
Orc?
That's what you are?
Or the beast in the cage was?
I know every races in the Seven Kingdoms.
I've never heard of orc.
Show me where you come from.
This is not orc world.
Orc world is dead.
Orcs take this world now.
Not from this world.
How did you get here?
The great gate.
Deep in ground and through
magic brought us here.
But how did you learn our language?
Orc take prisoner for the gate.
I learn from them.
Prisoners?
Our people?
Are they alive?
Yes.
Many.
Why?
To feed the gate.
To bring the Horde
to take your world.
You'll take us to them.
No.
You'll take us to them or you will
end up like your friend in the cage.
You think you are fearsome.
Orc children have pets
more fearsome than you.
We're not trying to be fearsome, Garona.
We are trying to protect
our people, our families.
If you help us.
I give you my oath.
You will have your freedom.
Fearsome Blackhand.
Warchief of the Horde.
You have allowed the smallteeths
to kill your warriors.
Worse.
You shamed your people
by running from an enemy.
Are you too weak
to talk, destroyer?
The Horde has no use for weakness.
Respect our tradition, warchief.
You know the penalty.
Death.
Done.
You dare interrupt this judgment?
We fought hard!
Their warlock use
your fel against us.
Only I can control the fel!
I see you and
your men have survived.
Perhaps Blackhand kept you
safely away from the battlefield.
Maybe he knows you are weak too.
Do you wish to challenge me,
little chieftain.
I do not question, Gul'dan.
But the fel is born of death,
must have a price.
A price paid in lives taken.
Will you hold your son?
He will be a great chieftain.
Like his father,
a born leader.
I was no leader today.
He challenges you already.
If Gul'dan can infect
born as innocent as he.
What chance do
the rest of us have?
Whatever happens.
Whatever happens.
I see you.
This gate,
who showed it to Gul'dan?
Who lead him to Azeroth?
Gul'dan call him a demon.
Did you see it?
Not the face,
but the voice...
Like fire and ash.
I'll be here if you need me.
Your mate.
I could kill you before
he even reaches me.
Lothar?
He is my brother.
The king is my mate.
You are the chieftain's wife then?
I suppose so.
Then killing you will bring
me even greater honor.
Not among my kind.
It is a cold night.
I thought you might use these.
It will warm you.
More of our villages burned tonight.
One of them is
the village of my birth.
I can not imagine what horrors
you have been through, Garona.
But this does not
need to happen.
We have peace in these lands
for many years now.
Peace between races
from all over the world.
What is this?
I can have it removed.
There is a life here for you, Garona.
With us.
A life of freedom.
If you want it.
The great gate.
From light comes darkness
and from darkness, light.
Well, that's clear.
Ask Alodi.
Alodi.
Ahh.
It's good to see trees again.
And the snow.
Even from a distance.
Remember when we would track
blood ox through the Frostwind dunes?
There is always meat.
Always life.
You know, it's strange
that we lost our home when
Gul'dan came to power.
One orc could not
kill a world, Durotan.
Are you sure?
Look around you.
Does it not remind you of something?
Wherever Gul'dan works his magic,
the land dies.
If our people are to make
a home here, my friend.
Gul'dan must be stopped.
We are not powerful
enough to defeat Gul'dan.
No.
No.
But with the humans help,
we could be.
I want that weapon.
You'll have me to protect you.
I need no one to protect me.
What are you looking at?
Bookworm.
Take the first watch.
Respectfully, Commander,
my name is Khadgar.
My deepest apologies, Khadgar.
You see, I thought
we bonded when
I didn't put you in a prison cell
for breaking into royal barracks.
Now take the watch.
Well.
At least you're not reading.
He wishes to lie with me.
I beg your pardon?
You will be injured
I don't want to lie with you.
Good.
You would not be
an effective mate.
Why do you laugh?
I can't see how you humans
survive such a thing.
No muscles to protect you.
Brittle bones that break.
You don't look that
different to us.
How did you survive?
Broken bones heal stronger.
My are very strong.
I'm sorry.
Do not be.
My name, Garona,
it means "curse" in orc.
My mother was burned alive
for giving birth to me.
They kept you alive though.
Gul'dan did.
He gave me her tusk
to remember her.
My parents gave me to the Kirin Tor
when I was 6 years old.
That's the last time I saw them or...
any of my brothers and sisters.
It brings a family honor
to offer a child to the Kirin Tor.
To have their son taken up
to the floating city of Dalaran
and be trained by the most
powerful mages in the land.
Less so,
to have them run away.
Well.
That was cheerful.
The great gate.
Why do they need
so many prisoners?
Like wood for a fire.
Green magic takes life
to open the gate.
How many more orcs are
they planning on bringing?
All of them.
This is just a warband.
When the portal is open,
Gul'dan will bring the Horde.
Get them back to Stormwind.
We ride ahead.
Garona, we should go.
It's not safe...
Durotan.
To the north, there is a black rock
that touches the sky.
I would meet with their leader.
To challenge him?
I saw you, lead the
smallteeths to our encampment.
They have seen
what is being built.
And only you know, what
Gul'dan has planned for my people.
His magic is death
to all things.
He must be stopped.
Tell him, the black rock,
when the sun is highest.
I will.
Chieftain.
If I returned, would you
take me into your clan?
You're safer here,
with them.
Is it as you feared?
The fel is everywhere.
Then you mustn't leave again.
They need the Guardian's help
now more than ever.
Maybe the boy can help.
We need solution!
Easy for you to say!
The Dwarf enforgers must work overtime.
You treat us no better than dogs.
We shall supply you no more!
Enough!
You have all called on Stormwind in
the past either for troops or arbitration.
If we do not unite to fight
this enemy, we will perish.
Stormwind needs soldiers,
arms, horses...
Ha! We have our own
kingdoms to look after.
Fight your own wars!
Your Majesty.
Commander.
The Orcs are building a portal, through
which they plan to bring an army.
If we do not stop them now,
we may never get another opportunity.
Where is he?
Where is the protector of Azeroth?
Where the Guardian?
Where is Medivh?
My liege.
I suggest we take a recess.
Take as long as you like.
We're done.
Commander.
What's left of the 4th
has retreated from Stonewatch.
What's left?
Callan is among the injured.
Dad?
I'm fine.
It's fine.
You had me worried.
Where's the rest of your troop?
They took most of them alive.
We'll get them back.
Don't be in such a hurry.
You're all I have.
I know.
I'm a soldier.
He would not ask for this meeting if
he thought he could defeat Gul'dan alone.
The fel must truly terrified him.
Durotan is scared of nothing.
The location.
The suddenness of this meeting.
Sounds like a trap.
It is not.
Could be.
It is not.
Could be.
It is not.
What do you think?
It's too good an
opportunity to ignore.
I think we have no choice.
We must stop the orcs
from opening the portal.
But we will need help.
And if he's lying?
Orcs do not lie.
What if he is?
There is no honor in it.
And where is the honor
in betraying his own people?
Durotan is protecting his clan.
His enemy is the fel.
Gul'dan is the betrayer.
This orc, Durotan.
How do you know him?
He freed me,
and he is loved by his clan.
He's a strong chieftain.
Strong chiefs must earn
their clans trust.
If we are to expect you
to join us.
We must earn yours.
To defend yourself.
With this?
Yes.
Find the Guardian.
What is this?
Guardian?
Uh.
The gate.
We saw it, in the morass.
I've been putting together
all the clues I can about it.
This.
This drawing.
Where did you copy it from?
Guardian.
And this?
And this?
And this?
I've been researching ever since
I felt the presence of the fel.
I am the Guardian.
Me, not you.
Not yet.
I just thought you might
appreciate some help.
Don't presume you can help me.
You have no idea the forces
I contend with.
If you want to help,
protect the king.
You leave the fel to me.
Interesting choice.
Guardian.
Pack up and move
to the west gate.
You there.
Pack up your stall
and get moving now!
I need your help.
I found a book.
Of course you did.
There was an illustration
that showed the gate
like the one
we saw being built.
Sorry. Sorry.
Khadgar.
Listen. I tried to show the Guardian
but he became furious.
He burned all my research.
He would have burn this too
If I hadn't hidden it in my robe.
No, turn the page.
Here.
Look.
See.
What do you think
the image means?
The orcs were summoned.
From this side of the gate.
They were invited in.
And the Guardian
burned your research.
He's probably just
trying to protect you.
Now go away.
Good spot for an ambush.
Our sentries are well placed.
I will check again.
You requested to speak
to the leader of the humans.
This is he.
I am the King Llane.
I'm told you wished to talk.
Ask him if they plan
to return to their home?
Our world is destroyed.
There is nothing to go back to.
We are not responsible
for destroying your world.
War with us will solve nothing.
He says,
"Orcs, war solves everything."
Then why is he here?
To save my people.
Fel takes life from
more than it's victims.
Kills the earth and
corrupts those who use it.
Gul'dan will poison everything
with his death magic.
If my people are to survive,
Gul'dan must be destroyed.
In 2 suns, the humans
we have captured...
... be used to fuel the portal.
If you attack our camp,
and draw his warriors away,
Frostwolf clan,
will kill him.
Two days.
If we do this,
you will protect my people until then.
I will try.
It's a trap!
Traitor die!
Retreat!
Back!
Return to our camp!
Fall back!
Stay together!
Focus.
Like old times.
Cover your flank!
.
Push!
You alright?
You are no good to us dead.
Go.
I'll get the others.
Fall back!
We're all getting out.
Medivh will cover our retreat.
Garona!
Stay together!
Fall back!
Keep it up!
Where's the bloody Guardian?
Protect the king.
I got them.
Move back!
Shield FORMATION !
Retreat to the plateau.
Fall back!
Up the hill.
Move!
Medivh.
Medivh, take it down!
Medivh!
Hold on, son.
Dad.
For Azeroth.
Medivh!
Stop.
Callan.
He's here!
What's wrong with him?
We need to get
him to Karazhan.
I'll get the horses.
You won't make any time by road.
Take one of my birds.
Place him in the fountain.
Moroes, what's wrong with him
I told him not to leave Karazhan.
I have to go.
We need the help of
the Karin Tor, now.
Go.
There are medicines I must prepare.
Sit with him.
You and the baby
must leave now.
You're a traitor, Durotan.
No.
One who values what we once were.
Like you used to.
That time is past.
We are but fuel
for the fel now.
There is still hope, Blackhand.
Our children.
Do not make me take more
innocent lives, young chieftain.
If I submit...
... will you let my people be?
What will I call our son?
Go'el
You.
Where's the older man?
He told me to watch you.
The king.
He is alive.
Lothar's son is dead.
I argued for the meeting.
Lothar will hate me.
This upsets you.
He is a great warrior.
He defends his people well.
A good mate for an orc.
I am no orc.
I am no human either.
When I was younger,
I used to feel apart from my kin.
I traveled far and wide,
looking for... wisdom.
Feel a connection with all the souls
I was charged with protecting.
On my travel, I met
a strong and noble people.
Among them, a female,
who accepted me for what I was.
Who loved me.
It was not a life
I was fated to have,
but it taught me something.
If love is what you need,
you must be willing to travel
to the end the world to find it.
You left your mate.
Go find Lothar.
Step inside the circle.
This... is my gift to you,
Garona.
A whole world and
exchange for a statue.
Gods are strange creatures.
Frostwolves, you are a practical people.
Those of us from the south have
always admired that about you.
When the portal opens,
when the rest of the Horde join us
we will give them the fel.
All of them.
Durotan did not agree to this!
And why would you care
what that traitor thinks?
It is time for a new leader
of the Frostwolf clan.
One who has the best interest
of his orcs in mind.
One who appreciates Gul'dan's vision,
... his power.
Come.
I will grant you the fel.
Durotan, he... has poisoned
the Frostwolves against the fel.
Let me gather them,
bring them here.
Grant me the fel in front of them,
let them see...
How much stronger I become.
As I said,
a practical people.
This is a new dawn.
The time of the Horde.
Be reverent,
or be killed.
I'm sorry.
Callan's mother,
died in childbirth.
I blamed him for it,
for years.
I'm not going to blame you.
He was so young.
In my entire life,
I have never felt
so much pain as I do now.
Gul'dan does not want to waste
his power on the Frostwolves.
Burn them!
Take the weak,
kill the strong!
I'll bath in your blood.
Maybe, but not now.
I can't give you long,
but I can give you a head start.
For the sake of your son, Draka.
Leave... now.
You should have trusted in your
chieftain, Orgrim Doomhammer.
Wait for me.
Khadgar!
How dare you to come here!
Get out!
I come seeking your wisdom.
There is nothing
for you here now.
The Guardian, Medivh, is unwell.
What?
He's been poisoned by the fel.
What?
Ridiculous.
What do you know
of the dark portal?
You come back,
and accused the Guardian...
What is Alodi?
How does he know?
Alodi.
What is it?
An entity from a time
before the Kirin Tor existed.
We think it serve the functions
similar to that of the Guardian.
Protector.
No one beyond the arch council knows
of it's existence, and it will stay that way.
And you to mention it
in the same breath
as the dark portal is
too much to be mere...
... coincidence.
Do I go in?
I don't know.
It's never done that before.
Khadgar.
I know you,
from the library.
You're Alodi?
I used the last of my energies
to summon you here.
The Guardian has betrayed us.
Medivh.
I saw the fel in his eyes.
He is consumed by it.
If he is not stopped,
this world will burn.
I don't have the power
to defeat a Guardian.
Guardian is but a name.
The true Guardians of this world
are the people themselves.
I know you see what
the Kirin Tor can not.
It's why you left them.
No one can stand against
the darkness... alone.
I don't understand what
you want me to do.
Yes, you do.
Trust in your friends.
Together, you can save this world.
Always remember...
From light comes darkness,
and from darkness... light.
Up, up.
Thank you, Moroes.
You'll recover, Guardian.
You always do.
No...
Thank you.
For everything you've done.
Sorry, old friend.
It seems I have let
the orcs into this world.
The fel has twisted me.
I...
... don't even know
what else I may have done.
I just don't remember.
Everything I fought to protect,
I have... destroyed.
I can't control the fel.
No one can.
Five legions to block Deadwind Pass.
Another ten here, here, and here,
along Redridge Mountains.
Supply lines here.
While the Eastern Sea hems
them in both south and east.
If we hold these positions,
we will be at our strongest.
Containment?
Until there is a better option, yes.
And where there is
10 times as many.
What then?
If there were easy answers...
Our priority must be
to stop the gate from opening.
Fail there, and it's
just a matter of time
before they beat us
with sheer numbers.
What do you suggest?
Send everything we got.
Destroy the gate, free our people,
and end the immediate threat.
And the Orcs that remain?
We'll take care of them later.
After they've ravaged the entire kingdom?
My Lords.
Medivh. You are up and well.
I am.
I feel... restored.
We need you.
We've been agonizing over our options.
Some of us believe
there are no options.
We need fresh eyes.
I have news.
I've met with Durotan.
You met with Durotan.
The rebellion against Gul'dan
is gaining strength.
With their help we can
destroy this gate.
That doesn't change my plan.
What plan?
Anduin believes we should
attack with full force.
I'm concerned it leaves the rest
of the kingdom defenseless.
How many legions would you need
to hold the orcs in place?
Five for Deadwind Pass.
Ten for the Redridge Mountains.
Ten more to protect the city.
We've already lost 18 legions.
That leaves one, two, three.
Can it be done, Medivh?
No, it can't be done.
With three legion,
Frostwolves, and my power...
With all due respect, Guardian,
your powers
have proved unreliable
at best recently.
Llane. Have I ever let you down?
Let him down?
Where have you even been
for the last 6 years?
Please, Anduin.
Medivh is the Guardian...
Not the one you remember.
He's lost it.
He's unstable.
And he won't be there
when you really need him.
Find your bearings, Anduin.
I'd march into hell for you,
if I thought there was a
slightest chance of victory.
But there isn't,
this is suicide.
Is this about Callan?
It was a tragedy.
If he hadn't been trying so hard
to win your approval,
he might still be with us.
Medivh.
Callan wasn't ready.
You knew it.
And you let him play soldier anyway.
Anduin, stop!
You killed him!
Commander.
Please, sir. Please.
Varis.
Take him to a cell to calm down.
You are no use
to us like this.
We'll protect the kingdom, my lord.
You and I.
Why are you here?
The king.
He goes to fight the Horde.
With your Guardian's help,
Durotan will kill Gul'dan.
Don't trust him.
I've told you,
Orcs do not lie.
Not Durotan.
Don't trust Medivh.
I will try to
protect your king.
Don't go with them.
Why?
I don't want you
to get hurt.
Come back alive.
Hey, Frostwolf.
Who goes...
Now you are enemies
with all sides.
I'll tell them it was you.
What happened?
I'm sorry, Durotan.
I did not see how we could
side with the humans...
against our own kind.
I was wrong.
Gul'dan's fel magic is destroying us.
Where Draka?
Safe?
But, the rest.
They won't follow him,
if they see what he has become.
And I will show them.
There is no other man I would entrust
the safety of my family to, Varian.
Keep them safe
while I'm gone.
Ready?
I would feel better if
Lothar were riding with us.
We'll be fine.
I'll return to Karazhan
and get ready for battle.
Find me at the portal.
Whoa. Whoa.
Whoa, whoa!
Guard.
I know you're just doing your job,
and a good one at that.
But I've cool down now.
So, if you just come
and open this gate.
So I can protect the king.
OPEN THE GATE !
I am just following my...
Where the hell have you been?
The Kirin Tor.
It only works on the simple minded,
last about a minute.
Your armor, commander.
Sorry.
They have a full day
ahead of us.
I just hope we're not too late.
We can't go after them.
Not if you want to save Azeroth.
My king needs me.
AZEROTH needs you more!
If you want to save your king,
we need to stop Medivh first.
Where is Medivh?
We got a demon to kill.
Go.
Search over here.
Remember.
You are the son of
Durotan and Draka,
an unbroken line of chieftains.
I am Durotan,
son of Garad.
Chieftain of the Frostwolf clan.
And I am here
to kill Gul'dan.
Ghost cannot invoke Mak'gora.
(Duel of honor)
You are the chieftain
of no clan.
Your people are food for worms.
Some of us still live, warchief.
Do I make
a quick end of them?
I always thought you were
one for tradition, Blackhand.
Durotan.
Your clan was weak,
and you are a traitor.
I accept your challenge,
if only to personally
ripped the heart out
of your pathetic body.
What of the portal?
You must be ready when
the incantation begins
This won't take long.
Kill him, Gul'dan!
It's the incantation
to the Orc home world.
He's opening the portal,
we need to shut him up.
The incantation.
I have no time for this.
Blackhand!
(... Orc tradition...)
This is a Mak'gora.
(Duel of honor)
You will respect our tradition.
Keep fighting.
Gul'dan cheats.
Cheating!
Shame on you!
You cheat, Gul'dan!
This is not our way.
Traitor!
GUL'DAN !
You have no honor.
You will follow this... demon?
Will you?
You will follow this demon?
I will not.
I follow a true Orc.
A chieftain.
May your balls rot, demon.
Anyone else?
And you, warchief.
You will take the fel,
and you will become stronger
than any Orc has ever been.
And when the fel has remade you,
you will crush the smallteeth.
Now claim my new world.
Legion!
Halt!
Frostwolves.
We are on our own now.
With you then.
Get to the prisoners.
We will free our people!
Charge!
Attack!
Ideas?
Very impressive.
Now try shutting him up.
Oh, that went well.
Ohhhhh.
He's moving, do something.
(What?)
Fine, I'll handle this.
You take care of Medivh.
Hey, over here.
Clayface.
Now, men!
Fire!
Come, my orcs.
Let the fel unleash the
full power of the Horde.
For Gul'dan!
For the Horde!
Hey, kid!
Wake up!
You alright?
Quick thinking.
Slicing it's head off like that.
Yeah.
Just how I planned it.
What now?
The Guardian has to speak
the incantation himself.
So uh...
As long as he is doing that...
... we can get in close.
Distract him.
Then what?
Get Medivh in the fountain.
Is that all?
Medivh.
If there is something of you
still in there, old friend,
come back to us.
Medivh.
Come.
Kill me.
I have got nothing left
to live for now anyway.
After all, life is just
fuel to you, isn't it?
But Llane, he believe in you.
Don't kill your king.
Don't kill your friend.
Whatever you plan to do, kid.
Do it now.
Now.
Now!
Now!
Now, kid!
The portal.
It's closing!
No.
You're stronger than he is.
From light comes darkness...
and from darkness... light.
Show me your eyes.
I have to go.
I'm proud of you.
Stormwind.
My lord.
Through the portal, Stormwind!
Thank you, Guardian.
Varis!
Legion, forward!
Attack!
Garona, ride with me.
Varis, set the men
in a perimeter.
Garona, Karos, take what men
we can spare and free the prisoners.
And send them through to Stormwind.
Form a line,
shield to shield!
We will hold
as long as we can.
Get to the portal.
Go.
Bless you.
Thank you.
I need more powder.
Get over there!
Help me push!
Come on, boys!
Put your scorn into it!
Over here! We'll go behind
the gate to attack them!
Take care of him.
We should leave.
We save as many of
our people as we can.
It's the loneliness
that makes us weak.
Khadgar.
I'm sorry.
I wanted to save us all.
I always did.
Move!
We've lost the Guardian.
Protect the flank!
Protect the flank!
Blackhand comes to claim
the honor of killing you.
Garona.
No good will come
from us both died.
Look around you,
we are surrounded.
Your killing me is the only
hope we have for peace.
You told Lady Taria that killing her
would bring you honor.
Well. Killing me
would make you a hero.
Survive.
Bring peace between
orcs and humans.
You must.
You must.
No.
No!
She has killed their chieftain,
Gul'dan.
The Horde embraces you.
Orc.
Kill him.
Kill him!
Gul'dan, the Mak'gora is sacred.
The human won, fairly.
Let your warriors honor their tradition.
I will not be disobeyed.
What are you waiting for?
Do as I say!
Traitors!
Get out of my way,
I'll do it myself.
Who will obey you?
If you go to war
with your own kind.
If you do this,
you will lose the Horde.
And this war is only beginning.
For your son.
So your spirit can teach him.
Garona's dagger.
I pulled that from Llane's neck.
Well.
There has to be an explanation.
Yes.
She made her choice.
I don't believe that.
Maybe you and I didn't know her
as well as we thought we did.
There is no greater blessing
a city can have
than a king who would
sacrifice himself for his people.
But such a sacrifice must be earned.
We must deserve it.
If we only show our unity
to mourn a good man's death.
Was King Llane wrong
to believe in you?
No!
No!
We will avenge you, my lady!
Lead us against the orcs, Lothar!
Lothar!
Lothar!
Lothar!
Lothar!
Lothar!
Lothar!
For Azeroth!
For Azeroth and the Alliance!
For Azeroth!
For Azeroth!
For the Alliance!
For the Alliance!
WARCRAF You will travel far, my little Go'el.
My world maybe lost,
but this is your world now.
Take what you need from it.
Make a home for the orcs
and let no one stand in your way.
My lord.
You should see this.
You are the son of
Durotan and Draka,
an unbroken line of chieftains.
And our people need
a leader now...
... more than ever.

Introduction Movie

Narrator The sands of time have run out, son of Durotan.  Cries of war, echo,
upon the winds.  The remnants of the past, scar the land... which is besieged
once again by conflict.

Various animations of the Orcs colliding with the humans on the battlefield
take place.  These battles continue throughout the movie.

Narrator Hero's arise to challenge fate and lead their brethren to battle.  As
mortal armies rush blindly towards their doom, the burning shadow comes to
consume us all.

You must rally the horde and lead your people to their destiny!  [Whisper] Seek

Prologue Campaign
Chapter One Chasing Visions

Somewhere in the Arathi Highlands, Thrall, the young warchief of he orcish
Horde, wakes from his troubling dream. The night is rainy.

Thrall What kind of nightmare was that?

A raven flies in and speaks to Thrall.  The voice is that of the narrator from
the opening movie.

The Prophet It was not a nightmare, young warchief, but a vision.  Follow me,
and I will reveal what your future holds.

Thrall I don't know what this is all about, but I'll play along.

Thrall follows the raven off into the forest.  The level takes place now, once
Thrall reaches the end of it, more dialogue occurs.  The Prophet is now in a
form which resembles a man.

The Prophet Greetings, son of Durotan.  I knew you'd find your way.

Thrall It was you I saw in the vision.  Who are you?  How do you know me?

The Prophet I know many things, young warchief, about you and your people.  My
identity, at this time, is unimportant.  What is important is that you rally
your people and leave these shores immediately.

Thrall Leave?  What's this all about, human?

The Prophet Human?  I left my humanity behind long ago, I am something...
different now.  Know that I have seen the future and beheld the great burning
shadow that is coming to consume this world.  You sense it as well, don't you?

Thrall The demons... are returning.

The Prophet Yes.  And only by leading your people across the sea, to the
distant lands of Kalimdor, will you have a chance to stand against them!

Thrall But how can we--

The Prophet I will answer all of your questions in time, young warchief.  For
now, rally your warriors and prepare to leave this land.  We will speak again.

The Prophet flies off.

Thrall None of this makes sense, but the spirits tell me... that I should
trust him.

Chapter Two Departures

Three days later, near the Lordaeron Coast.  Thrall is in a small orc
encampment, worried about what the future may hold.

Thrall It's been three days, and this... prophet has yet to show himself.  I
hope I'm not making a huge mistake by trusting him.

A Grunt runs up to Thrall.

Grunt Warchief, the clans are assembling as you ordered, but it will take them
some time to reach us.

Thrall Then we must prepare this camp immediately.  I want my warriors to have
food and proper lodgings when they arrive.

Grunt Yes, Warchief.

Thrall Warrior, has there been any word of Grom Hellscream?  He and the
Warsong clan were supposed to have been here by now.

Grunt No, Warchief.  We haven't heard from Hellscream in some time.

Thrall Damn it, Grom.  Where the hell are you?

You now play the mission, Thrall's Orcs set up their camp, but before long,
humans erect a bridge on the otherside of the river.

Human Captain You Orcs are in violation of the Alliance Internment Act!  We've
already captured one of your leaders.  If you surrender now, we'll spare your
lives.

Grunt Warchief, they say they've captured one of our leaders!  Maybe they're
referring to Grom?

Thrall I hope not.  But if they have captured Hellscream, I'll make them
regret it!  Lok-Tar Ogar!  Come, my warriors!  We must drive the humans back!

You play through again, working your way to Grom's imprisonment cage.  After
defeating a good sized human force, Thrall reaches Grom, and frees him.

Thrall Grom, are you alright?

Grom Hellscream I'm fine, little brother.  Luckily, they only injured my
pride.

Thrall Great, 'cause we're getting out of here now.  We're leaving the human
lands for good.

Grom Hellscream Finally, follow me.  I have an idea.

Grom walks over to a view of the river.  There are several human ships sitting
there.

Grom Hellscream We can set sail on the humans' own ships.

Thrall Perfect.  But we'll need to wait for the rest of the Horde--

Grunt The Horde is assembled, Warchief.  We await only your command.

The Orcs get on the ships and set sail.  The Prophet appears on top of the
coast, out of sight of the Orcs.

The Prophet No, go, young Thrall.  Sail west to the lands of Kalimdor.  It is
there that you will find your destiny.  It is there that your people's
salvation will be assured.

End prologue campaign.
Begin human campaign.

Cinematic.  The Prophet flies towards the human capital.  There is a meeting of
the human nations, discussing several issues.

We've received reports that the Orcs are regrouping.

Certainly the recent attacks against the internment camps are evidence enough.

Agreed.  The Horde is on the move.

This is absurd.  My nation will not standby and watch as the Horde amasses on
our doorstep.

Ambassador The Orcs are not our primary concern here.  How many times must I
repeat myself.  King Terenas, you must heed my warning.  This plague which has
gripped the Northlands could have dire ramifications.

The Prophet flies into the middle of the chamber.  Only the King seems to be
aware of its presence.

Plague!  You Wizards are just being paranoid!

Let's keep all of this in perspective.  Even if this plague poses a threat to
us, what do you propose we do about it?

Ambassador As I have said, Kirin Tor are already prepared to place the
villages under strict quarantine.

King Terenas I will not institute quarantine without proof of your claims,
ambassador.  The people of Lordaeron have suffered enough without becoming
prisoners in their own land.

The Prophet reveals himself.

The Prophet Yet, prisoners they are, good King.

King Terenas What is the meaning of this, who are you?

The Prophet Humanity is in peril, the tides of darkness have come again and
the whole world is poised on the brink of war.

Ambassador Enough of this.  Guards, remove this man!

The Prophet Hear me, the only hope for your people is to travel west to the
forgot lands of Kalimdor.

Ambassador Travel west, are you mad?

King Terenas Hold ambassador.  I don't know who you are or what you believe,
but this is not the time for rambling prophets.  Our lands are beset by
conflict, but it shall be we to decide how best to protect our people, not you.
Now, be gone!

The Prophet I failed humanity once before, and I will not do so again.  If you
can not take up this cup, I shall find another who will.

Chapter One The Defense of Strahnbrad

Recent orc uprisings in southern Lordaeron have forced the alliance to take
decisive measures.  To contain the orcish threat, King Terenas has sent two of
the realms greatest paladins, his son, Prince Arthas, and the legendary Uther
the Lightbringer, to deal with the Orcs once and for all.

Arthas approaches the area.  Uther's troops are training for battle.

Uther the Lightbringer Welcome, Prince Arthas.  The men and I are honored by
your presence.

Arthas Can the formalities, Uther.  I'm not king yet.  It's good to see you.

Uther the Lightbringer You too, lad.  I'm pleased that King Terenas sent you
to help me.

Arthas Father still hopes your patience and experience might rub off on me.

Uther the Lightbringer It is a father's right to dream, isn't it?

Arthas Look, here's where we stand.  Our scouts have confirmed that there is
an orc encampment hidden somewhere over the next ridge.

Uther the Lightbringer As I suspected.

Arthas It gets worse.  They're preparing to attack the nearby village of
Strahnbrad.  As far as we know, the village is completely defenseless.

Uther the Lightbringer I need to move against the Orcs' base immediately.  Can
you handle Strahnbrad's defense on your own?

Arthas Of course, Uther.  Don't worry about me.

Uther the Lightbringer Good.  Meet me at the orc camp once you've saved the
village.  Be careful, Arthas.

Uther heads off and Arthas begins heading towards the village.  It seems the
Orcs have beaten him there.  A slave master is already taking prisoners and
executing others.

Slave Master Haul these wretches off with the rest of them!

Grunt Move 'em out!

Arthas and his forces come up and take out the Orcs in the city.  Many
townsfolk gather at the sight of this victory.

Sylvia Bless you, Prince Arthas!

Daniel But what about the others who were taken away?

Arthas Don't worry, son.  We'll find them and bring them home safe.

A knight rushes in.

Knight Prince Arthas, Lord Uther needs you at the orc encampment immediately!

Arthas Never a dull moment.  Let's get moving!

Chapter Two Blackrock and Roll

A mere twenty minutes later, Arthas arrives at Uther's position, near the
Blackrock Clan's camp.

Uther the Lightbringer Ah, good timing, lad.  I sent two of my best knights in
to parley with the orc leader.  They should be returning shortly.

Moments later, two riderless horses come rushing out of the forest.

Uther the Lightbringer Damn.  These Orcs will never surrender

Arthas Then let's get in there and destroy the beasts!

Uther the Lightbringer Remember, Arthas, we are paladins.  Vengeance cannot be
a part of what we must do.  If we allow our passions to turn to bloodlust, then
we will become as vile as the Orcs.

Arthas Yes, Uther.

Uther the Lightbringer Now, if you're feeling up to it, I want you to lead the
attack.

Arthas Me?  Well, of course!

Uther the Lightbringer I'll remain here and ensure that none of the loathsome
beasts threaten the camp.

Arthas I won't fail you.

Uther the Lightbringer I know you won't.

Eventually, Arthas will get near the orc camp, and an Orc Blademaster will
approach the human base.  Uther quickly rushes to fight it.

Blademaster of the Blackrock Clan Paladin fool!  The warlocks of the Blackrock
clan have spoken!  Soon, demons will rain from the sky, and this wretched world
will burn!

Uther the Lightbringer Yes, I've heard this rhetoric before.  You Orcs will
never learn!

Uther strikes the blademaster, which quickly disperses into mist.

Uther the Lightbringer It was only a mirror image.  Damn it, what are these
curs up to?

At a sacrificial pit, the real blademaster has some human prisoners.

Blademaster The hour of doom approaches!  Let this paltry sacrifice appease
our demon masters!

Unlucky Footman You sick bastards!  You'll never get away with--

The blademaster kills all three human prisoners.

Arthas Slay the Orcs!  Slay them all!

Arthas and his army defeat the Blademaster and his forces.

Uther the Lightbringer You've done well, lad.  This was a sound victory.

Arthas I don't know, Uther.  The Orcs were sacrificing townsfolk.  I think
they were trying to summon demons.

Uther the Lightbringer Have faith, lad.  These Orcs are trying to hold on to
dying traditions.  We defeated their demons a long time ago.  Let's head for
home.  It's been a long day.

Intermission Jaina's meeting.

The scene shifts to mage kingdom of Dalaran, led by Antonidas.  The Prophet is
here attempting to make his case to yet another human leader.

The Prophet You must be wiser than the king!  The end is near!

Antonidas I told you before.  I'm not interested in this nonsense!

The Prophet Then I've wasted my time here.

The Prophet turns back into a raven and flies off.

Antonidas You can show yourself now, Jaina.  He's gone.

Jaina I'm sorry for eavesdropping master, but--

Antonidas {laugh} It's your inquisitive nature that I've come to rely on,
child.  That crazed fool's convinced that the world is about to end.

The teleport deeper into the castle.

Jaina I've heard the rumors of the plague spreading throughout the northlands.
Do you truly believe that the plague is magical in nature?

Antonidas It's a strong possibility.  That's why I need you to travel there
and investigate the matter.  I've arranged for a special envoy to assist you.

Jaina Yes, master.  I'll do my best.

Antonidas I know you will, child.  Farewell.

Chapter Three Ravages of the Plague.

Three days later near Alterac, Arthas and his men wait at a crossroads along
the King's road.

Captain Prince Arthas, we've been waiting here for hours.  Are you sure this
friend of yours is coming?

Arthas I'm sure.  Jaina usually runs a little late.

Jaina runs in from down the road, she's being pursued by a pair of Ogres.

Captain We must help her!

Arthas Stay your blade, Captain.  She can take care of herself.

With the help of her summoned water elemental, Jaina defeats one of the ogres.
The other runs off.

Arthas Gentlemen, meet Miss Jaina Proudmoore, special agent to the Kirin Tor,
and one of the most talented sorceresses in the land.  Looks like you haven't
lost your touch.  It's good to see you again, Jaina.

Jaina You too, Arthas.  It's been awhile since a prince escorted me anywhere.

Arthas Yes, it has.  Well, I guess we should get underway.

Jaina Our sources believe the plague originated in the region north of here.
We should check out the villages along the King's Road.

Arthas, Jaina, and the rest of the troops move along.  They encounter a small
farm.

Stacie Prince Arthas!  There's something amiss at the bridge ahead!

They continue onward to find the bridge has been broken.

Achilles Milord, someone has destroyed the bridge from the far side of the
river.  There is another way to cross, but it's not as safe as it used to be.

Arthas continues onward, being attacked by several bandits along the way.
After crossing to the otherside of the river, the Prince runs into a pack of
skeletons.  He continues to the outskirts of the village, which is burning.
There are some troops nearby.

Arthas What were those creatures, Sergeant?

Sergeant Undead, milord!  This whole village has gone mad!  We did our best to
defend the villagers, but--

Arthas We'll get to the bottom of this.

Arthas and Jaina continue on.  They pass a granary which is swarmed with flies.

Jaina It's as if the land around that granary is... dying.

Arthas Could the grain itself be plagued?

Jaina Let's hope not.  Those crates bear the regional seal of Andorhal, the
distribution center for the northern boroughs.  If this grain can spread the
plague, there's no telling how many villages might be affected.

They continue to the village itself.  There are a few elven priests there.

Priest Greetings.  We are the priests from Quel'Thalas.  We've come to help
heal the land of this strange curse.

Jaina As always, the generosity of the elves is greatly appreciated.

Priest You should know that there is a granary warehouse at the far end of
this village.  This evil blight may be evident there as well.

Arthas We'll check it out.

Just a few buildings ahead, a dwarven mortar team is randomly firing out into
the night.

Arthas What the hell are you men shooting at?

Mortar Team We're blasting those damned skeletons, sir.  This whole flaming
village is crawling with them.

Arthas Well, I could use your help.  We've got a warehouse to destroy at the
end of town.

Arthas continues towards the warehouse.  Several undead are gathered around a
necromancer.  There are many crates of grain sitting near them.

Kel'Thuzad [Necromancer] We've been discovered, my brothers!  Flee and
continue with the operation!  I'm sorry I can't stay and chat. but... duty
calls.

A large stitched up creature appears from a nearby building.  It along with a
few other undead come near Arthas and Jaina while Kel'Thuzad retreats.

Jaina That creature looks like it was sewn together from different corpses.

Arthas Let's study it after we kill it, okay?

Arthas and crew destroy the undead and eventually the warehouse holding the
plagued grain.

Arthas What was that?  And who was that wizard dressed in black?

Jaina I believe that the robed man was a necromancer.  Obviously, he and his
lackeys are behind this plague.

Arthas Well, it's a good bet we'll find him, and the answers we're looking
for, in Andorhal.

Chapter Four The Cult of the Damned

The next day, outside of Andorhal, Arthas and Jaina catch up to the undead.
Arthas decides to make the next move.

Jaina Look, the cultists who were with the necromancer!  What are they doing
to that mine?

Arthas Let's not wait to find out!  Attack!

Undead Acolyte Damn these intruders!  They must not interfere with the
master's plan!

Arthas Let's build a base camp here.  With those cultists creeping around, I'd
rather not head in there without backup.

Jaina I couldn't agree more.

Arthas' troops quickly set up a small camp.  As Arthas begins to explore the
area, it becomes clear that he and Jaina are too late, and that the grain has
already been sent out.  Eventually, he enters the necromancer.

Kel'Thuzad Hello again, children.  I am Kel'Thuzad, and I've come to deliver a
warning.  Leave well enough alone.  Your curiosity will be the death of you.

Arthas Are you responsible for this plague, necromancer?  Is this cult your
doing?

Kel'Thuzad Yes, I ordered the Cult of the Damned to distribute the plagued
grain.  But the sole credit is not mine.

Jaina What do you mean?

Kel'Thuzad I serve the dreadlord Mal'Ganis.  He commands the Scourge that will
cleanse this land and establish a paradise of eternal darkness!

Arthas And what exactly is this Scourge meant to cleanse?

Kel'Thuzad Why, the living, of course.  His plan is already in motion.  Seek
him out at Stratholme if you need further proof.

Kel'Thuzad runs off, deeper into Andorhal, but Arthas is not satisfied.  He
pursues and eventually wounds Kel'Thuzad, mortally.

Kel'Thuzad Naive fool.  My death will make little difference in the long run.
For now, the scourging of this land... begins.

Kel'Thuzad dies.

Chapter Five March of the Scourge.

Arthas and Jaina arrive in Hearthglen the next day, passing through on their
way to Stratholme.

Jaina Hearthglen, finally!  I could use some rest!

Arthas It looks like they're preparing for battle.

Footman Prince Arthas!  During the night, a vast army of undead warriors
emerged and began attacking the villages at random.  Now, it's heading this
way!

Arthas Damn it, Jaina.  I'll stay here and protect the village.  Go as quickly
as you can and tell Lord Uther what's happened.

Jaina But--

Arthas Go, Jaina!  Every second counts!

Jaina teleports away.  Arthas catches glimpse of some open crates.

Arthas Wait-- What did those crates contain?

Footman Just a grain shipment from Andorhal.  There's no need to worry,
milord.  It's already been distributed amongst the villagers.

Arthas Oh no.  The plague was never meant to simply kill my people.  It was
meant to turn them... into the undead!  Defend yourselves!

Several villagers turn into undead creatures.  Arthas and the forces of the
town make easy work of them, but it is going to take Jaina quite some time to
return with Uther, and Arthas will need to hold out until then.  Before long,
there are streams of undead leaking into the village from several directions.
Arthas and his troops are well outnumbered and falling fast.

Arthas Light, give me strength!

The trumpets blow, Uther the Lightbringer and an army of Alliance Knights come
charging in.  Jaina is with them.

Uther the Lightbringer For Lordaeron!  For the king!

Uthers knights take out a healthy amount of the undead, what is left retreat
from the village.

Arthas Uther, your timing couldn't have been better.

Uther the Lightbringer Don't celebrate yet, son.  This battle's far from over!
I'm surprised that you kept things together as long as you did, lad.  If I
hadn't arrived just then--

Arthas Look, I did the best I could, Uther.  If I'd had a legion of knights
riding at my back, I would've--

Uther the Lightbringer Now is not the time to be choking on pride!  What we
faced here was only the beginning.  The undead ranks are bolstered every time
one of our warriors falls in battle.

Arthas Then we should strike at their leader!  I'll go to Stratholme and kill
Mal'Ganis myself if I have to!

Uther the Lightbringer Easy, lad.  Brave as you are, you can't hope to defeat
a man who commands the dead all by yourself.

Arthas Then feel free to tag along, Uther.  I'm going.  I'm going, with or
without you.

Arthas journey's through the woods to Stratholme entirely alone.  After a while
he runs into the Prophet.

The Prophet Greetings, young prince.  We must talk.

Arthas I have no time for this!

The Prophet Listen to me, boy.  This land is lost!  The shadow has already
fallen, and nothing you do will deter it.  If you truly wish to save your
people, lead them across the sea... to the west.

Arthas Flee?  My place is here, and my only course is to defend my people!

The Prophet Then your choice is already made.  Just remember, the harder you
strive to slay your enemies, the faster you'll deliver your people right into
their hands.

The Prophet turns into a raven and flies off.  Jaina, who had concealed herself
throughout this conversation, reveals herself.

Jaina I'm sorry for concealing myself, Arthas.  I just wanted to--

Arthas Don't say it!

Jaina I sensed tremendous power about him, Arthas.  Maybe he's right.  Maybe
he does know what will happen.

Arthas Nothing he can say will make me abandon my homeland, Jaina.  I don't
care if that madman has seen the future.  Let's go.

They run off, heading to Stratholme.

Chapter Six The Culling

Early the next morning, Jaina and Arthas arrive near Stratholme.  Uther arrives
as well.

Arthas Glad you could make it, Uther.

Uther the Lightbringer Watch your tone with me, boy.  You may be the prince,
but I'm still your superior as a paladin!

Arthas As if I could forget.  Listen, Uther, there's something about the
plague you should know...

Arthas looks around and sees grain crates already opened.

Arthas Oh no.  We're too late.  These people have already been infected!  They
may look fine now, but it's just a matter of time before they turn into the
undead!  This entire city must be purged.

Uther the Lightbringer How can you even consider that?  There's got to be some
other way.

Arthas Damn it, Uther!  As your future king, I order you to purge this city!

Uther the Lightbringer You are not my king yet, boy!  Nor would I obey that
command even if you were!

Arthas Then I must consider this an act of treason.

Uther the Lightbringer Treason?  Have you lost your mind, Arthas?

Arthas Have I?  Lord Uther, by my right of succession and the sovereignty of
my crown, I hereby relieve you of your command and suspend your paladins from
service.

Jaina Arthas, you can't just--

Arthas It's done!  Those of you who have the will to save this land, follow
me!  The rest of you... get out of my sight!

Uther the Lightbringer You've just crossed a terrible threshold, Arthas.

Uther runs off with several knights, Jaina turns to run off as well.

Arthas Jaina?

Jaina I'm sorry, Arthas.  I can't watch you do this.

She runs off as well.  Arthas begins on a quest to purge zombies from town. His
plans are interrupted though, when an undead leader appears.

Mal'Ganis I've been waiting for you, young prince.  I am Mal'Ganis.  As you
can see, your people are now mine.  I will now turn this city household by
household, until the flame of life has been snuffed out... forever.

Mal'Ganis knocks down a home and turns those humans who were inside into
undead.

Arthas I won't allow it, Mal'Ganis!  Better that these people die by my hand
than serve as your slaves in death!

Arthas proceeds to slaughter as many townsfolk as he can before Mal'Ganis is
able to turn them into undead.  Eventually, they will meet up.

Arthas We're going to end this right now, Mal'Ganis.  Just you and me.

Mal'Ganis Brave words.  Unfortunately for you, it won't end here.  Your
journey has just begun, young prince.  Gather your forces and meet me in the
arctic land of Northrend.  It is there that we shall settle this score between
us.  It is there that your true destiny will unfold.

Arthas I'll hunt you to the ends of the earth if I have to!  Do you hear me?
To the ends of the earth!

Three days later, Uther the Lightbringer bringing approaches Jaina Proudmoore,
as they both stand amongst the slaughtered village of Stratholme.  The remains
of bodies are being burned, most of the town is still burning.

Jaina So much death... I can't believe Arthas could've done this.

Uther the Lightbringer Jaina!  Jaina Proudmoore!

Jaina Lord Uther?

Uther the Lightbringer Ah, Jaina.  I thought I might find you here.  Where has
he gone, girl?  Where has Arthas taken the fleet?

Jaina He came to me before he left, I pleaded with him not to go.  I told him
it sounded like a trap!

Uther the Lightbringer Where?

Jaina Northrend.  He's gone to Northrend to hunt Mal'Ganis.

Uther the Lightbringer Damn that boy!  I've got to inform King Terenas.  Don't
be too hard on yourself, girl.  You had nothing to do with this... slaughter.

Uther heads off, the Prophet appears before Jaina.

The Prophet The dead in this land might lie still for the time being, but
don't be fooled.  Your young prince will find only death in the cold north.

Jaina You!  Arthas is only doing what he believes is right!

The Prophet Commendable as that may be, his passions will be his undoing.  It
falls to you now, young sorceress.  You must lead your people to the west to
the ancient lands of Kalimdor.  Only there can you combat the shadow and save
this world from the flame.

Chapter Seven The Shores of Northrend

A month has passed, Arthas' fleet has just arrived at the distant shores of
Northrend, in Daggercap Bay.  He has several boats and troops with him.

Captain This is a Light-forsaken land, isn't it?  You can barely even see the
sun!  This howling wind cuts to the bone and you're not even shaking.  Milord,
are you alright?

Arthas Captain, are all my forces accounted for?

Captain Nearly.  There are only a few ships that--

Arthas Very well.  Our first priority is to set up a base camp with proper
defenses.  There's no telling what's waiting for us out there in the shadows.

The troops follow Arthas in search of a good location to make a camp.
Eventually, they'll spot a gold mine.

Arthas Ah, a gold mine!  We'll set up base there.

The peasants rush towards to build.  One of them is shot at and stunned from
some dwarfs hiding.

Arthas We're under attack!  Take cover!

Muradin Bronzebeard Bloody Hell!  You're not undead!  You're all alive!

Arthas Muradin?  Muradin Bronzebeard, is that you?

Muradin Bronzebeard Damn, boy, I never imagined that you'd be the one to come
to our rescue!

Arthas Rescue?  Muradin, I didn't even know you were here.

Muradin Bronzebeard Just the same, lad.  I could use your help.  My mates and
I were attacked and we got separated.  I'd appreciate any backup you could give
me.

Arthas Of course I'll help, Muradin.  Let's move!

Arthas eventually saves Muradin's men and then presses onward to a nearby
undead base, which he destroys.  It's time for him to get some answers, though.

Arthas  All right, Muradin.  What were you doing up here, anyway?

Muradin Bronzebeard Well, lad, there's an ancient way gate that lies somewhere
in this glacial wasteland.  Supposedly, it transports you to a hidden vault
where a runeblade named Frostmourne is held.  We came here to recover
Frostmourne, but the closer we came to finding the way gate, the more undead we
encountered.

One of Arthas' troops rushes up.

Captain Prince Arthas, we haven't found any trace of Mal'Ganis.

Arthas No matter.  He can't hide from me forever.  Captain, I want you to
establish this site as our primary base.

Captain Yes, milord.

Chapter Eight Dissension

The next morning, at the new base camp a messenger from King Terenas arrives
from a zeppelin.

Captain I apologize, emissary, but the prince is away on an errand.  What
brings you to this desolate place?

Emissary By royal edict, you men are to return to Lordaeron immediately.  Lord
Uther has convinced the king to recall this expedition.

Captain We're to just pick up and leave?

Emissary That's correct.  My men report that the roads from here to the shore
are held by the undead.  You'll need to find an alternate route back to your
ships.

Captain To hell with the undead!  We'll cut our way through the woods, men!

The peasants begin chopping down the trees.  A while later, Arthas returns to
base camp and notes no one on duty.

Arthas Captain, why are the guards not at their posts?

Captain Well, milord, your father had our troops recalled at Lord Uther's
request.

Arthas Uther had my troops recalled?  Damn it!  If my warriors abandon me,
I'll never defeat Mal'Ganis.  The ships must be burned before the men reach the
shore!

Muradin Bronzebeard Isn't that a bit much, lad?

Arthas Burned down to their frames!  No one goes home until our job here is
done!

Quickly, Arthas realizes a problem.  He'll need to take the road to beat the
rest of his army to the boats, but it is packed with undead.  At the advice of
Muradin Bronzebeard, they hire several mercenaries from nearby camps.  Arthas
and Muradin sink all five ships waiting, the final one moments before the rest
of Arthas' troops arrive.

Arthas Quickly, my warriors!  These murderous creatures [referring to the
mercenaries] have burned our ships and robbed you of your way home!  Slay them
all in the name of Lordaeron!

Footman Damn beasts!

Knight Kill them all!

The mercenaries are killed by Arthas' men.

Footman Our ships are ruined.  What will we do now?

Arthas Listen to me, all of you!  There is no way home for any of us, save
through victory!  In this land we will stand or fall together.  Now, return to
the base and man your posts.

Chapter Nine Frostmourne

The next day at camp, Muradin confronts Arthas.

Muradin Bronzebeard You lied to your men and betrayed the mercenaries who
fought for you.  What's happening to you, Arthas?  Is vengeance all that's
important to you?

Arthas Spare me, Muradin.  You weren't there to see what Mal'Ganis did to my
homeland.

As they speak, the valleys echo with the sounds of the undead.  Mal'Ganis
approaches.

Mal'Ganis The Dark Lord said you would come.  This is where your journey ends,
boy.  Trapped and freezing at the roof of the world, with only death to sing
the tale of your doom.

Muradin Bronzebeard This looks bad.  We're completely surrounded.

Arthas There's still one chance.  Help me claim Frostmourne!  If it's as
powerful as you said, it might tilt the scales in our favor!

Muradin Bronzebeard I have a bad feeling about this, lad.  But I promised I'd
see this through.

Arthas Captain, I'll leave you to organize our defense.  Let's move out.

Arthas and Muradin head over to the waygate.  It transports them north into a
valley.  The valley is guarded by several creatures, but Arthas pushes through
them.  Eventually they reach a huge guardian, he warns them back.  Arthas, of
course, does not care, and wipes it out.

Guardian Turn away... before it's... too late.

The gates he protected open and Arthas and Muradin go through.  Frostmourne
floats above an alter, contained in ice.

Arthas Behold, Muradin, our salvation, Frostmourne.

Muradin Bronzebeard Hold, lad.  There's an inscription on the dais.  It's a
warning.  It says, "Whomsoever takes up this blade shall wield power eternal.
Just as the blade rends flesh, so must power scar the spirit."  Oh, I should've
known.  The blade is cursed!  Let's get the hell out of here!

Arthas I would gladly bear any curse to save my homeland.

Muradin Bronzebeard Leave it be, Arthas.  Forget this business and lead your
men home.

Arthas Damn the men!  Nothing shall prevent me from having my revenge, old
friend.  Not even you.  Now, I call out to the spirits of this place.  I will
give anything or pay any price, if only you help me save my people.

The ice surrounding Frostmourne shatters.  A shard of it impales Muradin, thus
killing him.  Presumably, the rest of the men with Arthas die here as well.
Frostmourne lands on the ground.  Arthas drops his paladin war hammer and picks
up Frostmourne.  He returns to the way gate back to the camp.  The captain is
there waiting.

Captain Prince Arthas!  Where is Muradin?  We can't hold out for much longer!

Arthas Muradin is dead.  But take heart, Captain.  The enemy will not stand
long against the might of Frostmourne!

With his new found rune blade, Arthas is easily able to overwhelm the forces of
the undead.  He reaches Mal'Ganis after defeating the rest of the undead.

Mal'Ganis So, you've taken up Frostmourne at the expense of your comrades'
lives, just as the Dark Lord said you would.  You're stronger than I thought.

Arthas You waste your breath, Mal'Ganis.  I heed only the voice of Frostmourne
now.

Mal'Ganis You hear the voice of the Dark Lord.  He whispers to you through the
blade you wield.  What does he say, young human?  What dose the Dark Lord of
the Dead tell you now?

Arthas He tells me that the time for my vengeance has come.

Mal'Ganis What?  He can't possibly mean to--

Arthas Kills Mal'Ganis.

Arthas It is finished.

Arthas runs off into the cold mountains.  As he roams, the voice of Frostmourne
slowly torments him, until he loses what is left of his sanity.  Now, driven by
the dark will of the sword, Frostmourne, Arthas returns to Lordaeron for his
reward.  He enters the castle after passing through the great courtyard.  He
bows down before his father, King Terenas.

King Terenas Ah, my son.  I knew you would [the rest of his speech is drowned
out by Arthas]

Arthas [perhaps the voice of Frostmourne] You no longer need to sacrifice for
your people.  You no longer need to bear the weight of your crown.  I've taken
care of everything.

He grabs his sword and rushes King Terenas.

King Terenas What is this, what are you doing my son.

Arthas Succeeding you, father.

Arthas kills Terenas.  The bloodstained crown rattles down the throne stairs
before coming to rest.

Arthas This kingdom shall fall.  And from he ashes shall arise a new order,
which will shake the very foundations of the world.

End human campaign.
Begin undead campaign.

Chapter One Trudging through the Ashes

The Lich King's plague of undeath has spread through the capital city and into
the outskirts of Lordaeron.  Shocked and disheartened by the loss of their
beloved king, the forces of Lordaeron were scattered by the ravenous undead
warriors.  Now, Lordaeron is but a shadow of its former glory - and Prince
Arthas has yet to be seen...

Near a small village, Arthas is teleported in by some undead spell.  Arthas is
no longer human, at least, not fully.  He carries Frostmourne still, riding on
an undead horse.  His skin and hair are now grey.

Arthas What trickery is this?

He sees a dreadlord on a ridge nearby, with several other undead.

Arthas Mal'Ganis!  I don't know how you survived, but I will--

Tichondrius Calm yourself, Prince Arthas.  I am Tichondrius.  Like Mal'Ganis,
I am a dreadlord, but I am not your enemy.  In truth, I've come to congratulate
you.

Arthas Congratulate me?

Tichondrius By killing your own father and delivering this land to the
Scourge, you have passed your first test.  The Lich King is pleased with
your... enthusiasm.

Arthas Yes, I've damned everyone and everything I've ever loved in his name,
and I still feel no remorse.  No shame.  No pity.

Tichondrius The runeblade that you carry was forged by the Lich King and
empowered to steal souls.  Yours was the first one it claimed.

Arthas Then I'll make do without one.  What is the Lich King's will?

Tichondrius The cult of the damned must be rallied once again.  Many of the
acolytes have been in hiding amongst the populace.  Once you've rallied them, I
will give you further instructions.

Arthas begins searching out the Acolytes.  The first one greets him.

Acolyte Greetings, great lord.  Our master, Kel'Thuzad, told us that you would
come.

Arthas Kel'Thuzad?  How could he have known that--

Acolyte Be wary.  If the townsfolk see your undead minions, they'll call the
local guards to stop you.

As Arthas rescues the 20 acolytes, various townsfolk and alliance guards who do
see him will shout out nasty things about Arthas killing Terenas and betraying
his people.  Once found, the acolytes will rally near Tichondrius.

Tichondrius Well done, death knight.  The cult is nearly assembled.

Arthas Lordaeron lies in ashes.  What good are these cultists to us now?

Tichondrius They will aid you in your next undertaking.

Arthas And what's that?

Tichondrius You will go to Andorhal and recover the remains of the acolytes'
former master, the necromancer, Kel'Thuzad.

Chapter Two Digging up the Dead

The next day, just outside of Andorhal. Arthas arrives with some undead troops.
Some mechanical devices are brought along with.

Arthas What the hell is that?

Acolyte This crude contraption will allow you to transport the remains of our
master.

Arthas Can you not simply raise the remains when we find them?

Acolyte Pardon, Lord. but a being of Kel'Thuzad's power can only be reanimated
at a nexus of powerful ley-energies, and there are no such places in this land.

Arthas Very well, then.  Let's move out.

There are three paladins along the way which Arthas must kill in order to reach
his ultimate goal.  The first guards the ashes of Kel'Thuzad.

Gavinrad the Dire Arthas!  Stop this madness before it's too late!

Arthas Stand aside, brother, I've come to collect some old bones, and I don't
wish to be disturbed.

Arthas mortally wounds Gavinrad.

Gavinrad the Dire I can't believe that we ever called you brother!  I knew it
was a mistake to accept a spoiled prince into our order!  You've made a mockery
of the Silver Hand!

Arthas gets to the ashes of Kel'Thuzad.

Arthas Come along now, necromancer.  The powers that you once served have need
of you again.

Kel'Thuzad Told you my death would mean little.

Arthas What the...  Am I hearing ghosts now?

Kel'Thuzad It is I, Kel'Thuzad.  I was right about you, Prince Arthas.

Tichondrius It took you long enough.  These remains are badly decomposed.
They will never survive the trip to Quel'Thalas.

Arthas Quel'Thalas?

Tichondrius Yes.  Only the energies of the high elves' sunwell can bring
Kel'Thuzad back to life.

Arthas Then what must be done?

Tichondrius You must steal a very special urn from the paladins' keeping.
Place the necromancer's remains within it, and he will be well protected for
the journey.

Arthas As you wish.

Arthas continues deeper into the Silver Hand territory.  He encounters another
paladin.

Ballador the Bright Vile betrayer!  You are not fit enough to even carry your
father's name!  Why Uther ever vouched for you is beyond me.  You've stripped
him of his honor by casting yours to the winds!  You deserve a gruesome death,
boy!

Arthas disposes of him quickly, and runs into another paladin.

Sage Truthbearer Light and mercy on you!  Your betrayal has broken Uther's
heart, boy.  He would have given his life for yours in a second, and this is
how you repay his loyalty?

Arthas kills this paladin as well, and finally reaches Uther's position.  Uther
holds the urn which Tichondrius has sent Arthas to get.

Uther the Lightbringer Your father ruled this land for seventy years, and
you've ground it to dust in a matter of days.

Arthas Very dramatic, Uther.  Give me the urn, and I'll make sure you die
quickly.

Uther the Lightbringer The urn holds your father's ashes, Arthas!  What, were
you hoping to piss on them one last time before you left his kingdom to rot?

Arthas I didn't know what it held.  Nor does it matter.  I'll take what I came
for one way or another.

Arthas defeats Uther.

Uther the Lightbringer I dearly hope that there's a special place in hell
waiting for you, Arthas.

Arthas We may never know, Uther.  I intend to live forever.

Uther dies, Arthas puts Kel'Thuzad's ashes into the urn, and Tichondrius
teleports in.

Tichondrius Excellent work.  Now, your journey to Quel'Thalas can begin.

Kel'Thuzad [To Arthas] Tell him nothing!  Only you can hear me.  The
dreadlords cannot be trusted.  They are the Lich King's jailors!  I will tell
you all... when I walk this world again.

The Dreadlords Convene

At a secret meeting place, several Dreadlords get together to talk of coming
events.

Anetheron Is everything proceeding as planned, Tichondrius?  Lord Archimonde
demands a report on the Scourge.

Tichondrius The Lich King's young death knight has been performing well...
almost too well.  I begin to wonder if Ner'zhul has ulterior motives for his
new... champion.

Mephistroth The human means nothing in the long run.  Ner'zhul wouldn't dare
undermine our efforts now.

Anetheron Our only concern is that the Scourge accomplishes what it was
created to do.  Archimonde will have all our heads if we do not keep control of
the situation!

Tichondrius Believe me, brother. Neither the Lich King nor his undead lackeys
will jeopardize the Legion's return!

Anetheron See that they do not.  Lord Archimonde has little patience for
failure.

The meeting ends and the Dreadlords go back to wherever it is they came from.

Chapter Three Into the Realm Eternal

Six days later near Quel'Thalas, Arthas approaches.

Arthas Ah, wondrous, eternal Quel'Thalas.  I haven't been here since I was a
boy.

Kel'Thuzad Be wary.  The elves likely wait in ambush.

Arthas The frail elves do not concern me, necromancer.  Our forces are
strengthened with every foe we slay.

Kel'Thuzad Don't be too overconfident, death knight.  The elves must not be
taken lightly.

Arthas We shall see.  Bring forth the prisoner.

An elf is brought forward by some ghouls.

Arthas Where is the entrance to your land, elf?

Elven Priest You will never enter Quel'Thalas, fallen prince.  The woods
themselves protect our borders and the enchanted elfgates protect our capital.

Arthas Your precious gates will not stop me any more than these trees, little
elf.  Bring up the meat wagons!  We'll make our own entrance.

The Meat Wagons make a small hole in the forest, which reveals a tiny elf
village.

Kel'Thuzad The energies of this place are strong.  Kill the elves!  Level
their structures!  This location is perfect for your base.

Arthas It'll be a  pleasure.

Arthas attacks.

High Elf Archer The undead are advancing!  Alert the sentries!

The small village is easily taken, soon, Arthas is on the move again.  He runs
into an archer.

Sylvanas Windrunner You are not welcome here.  I am Sylvanas Windrunner,
Ranger General of Silvermoon.  I advise you to turn back now.

Arthas It is you who should turn back, Sylvanas.  Death itself has come to
your land.

Eventually, Arthas destroys the first elfgate.  Sylvanas and the rest of the
elves watch it happen.

Sylvanas Windrunner Shindu fallah Na!  Fall back to the second gate!  Fall
back!

Arthas The elfgate has fallen!  Onward, my warriors!  Onward to victory!

Chapter Four Key of the Three Moons.

Moments later, as the pursuing Undead army approaches the second gate, they
reach a bridge where Sylvanas is.

Sylvanas Windrunner Fall back to the trees!  You've won through this gate,
butcher, but you won't get through the second.  The inner gate to Silvermoon
can only be opened with a special key, and it shall never be yours!

Arthas You waste your time, woman.  You cannot outrun the inevitable.

Sylvanas Windrunner You think that I'm running from you?  Apparently you've
never fought elves before.

Sylvanas activates a spell, starfall, and it destroys the bridge she had stood
on.  Arthas is trapped on the other side of the river.

Arthas Damn that woman!  We must find a way to cross the river!

It doesn't take Arthas long to set up a base camp with a method for crossing
the river.  There are three small elven encampments, each holding a piece to
the key.  Once he finds the first, Kel'Thuzad explains its purpose.

Kel'Thuzad That mooncrystal is a component of the Key of the Three Moons.  The
other two crystals must be found... if the elfgate is to be unlocked.

Once Arthas has all three parts, he moves to the second elfgate.

Arthas Finally....

The gate is opened.

Arthas The gates have been opened!  Once we've dealt with Sylvanas, the inner
kingdom shall be ours!

Arthas proceeds inward.

Sylvanas Windrunner Damn you monsters!  What will it take to drive you back?

Arthas The ranger woman is starting to vex me greatly.

Chapter Five The fall of Silvermoon

Moments later, as Arthas approaches the elven capital of Silvermoon,
Tichondrius makes a guest visit at his base camp.

Tichondrius You've done well... so far.  But the true test still lies before
you.

Arthas I was wondering when you'd show up.

Tichondrius I am here to ensure that you do your job, little human.  Not do it
for you.

Arthas I will reach the Sunwell on my own, dreadlord.

Tichondrius Be warned.  It is a pool of mystical energy from which the elves
draw their immortal powers.  They will not give it up easily.

Tichondrius vanishes.

Arthas [To Kel'Thuzad's spirit] Do you think he suspects that you've been
aiding me, necromancer?

Kel'Thuzad I'm sure he suspects quite a bit.  It is his nature to assume the
worst.  Now steel yourself.  The hour of my rebirth draws near.

The bonus quest here is rather important to the events of the Frozen Throne, so 
I'll go into them, though I usually don't.  One of the two optional missions 
has you destroy Sylvanas Windrunner's base.  Once every building in it is down, 
Arthas and her go one on one.

Arthas I salute your bravery, elf, but the chase is over.

Sylvanas Windrunner Then I'll make my stand here, butcher.  Anar'alah belore.

Arthas strikes her to the ground, she's near the death.

Sylvanas Windrunner Finish it!  I deserve... a clean death.

Arthas After all you've put me through, woman, the last thing I'll give you is 
the peace of death.

Arthas starts casting a spell.

Sylvanas Windrunner No!  You wouldn't dare!

Arthas turns her into a banshee.  In The Frozen Throne, she will be a dark 
ranger, perhaps more fitting.

After a hard fought battle, Arthas reaches the pool of energy and defeats its
guardians, the golems.  The time is now.

Arthas Citizens of Silvermoon!  I have given you ample opportunities to
surrender, but you have stubbornly refused!  Know that today, your entire race
and your ancient heritage will end!  Death itself has come to claim the high
tome of the elves!  Now, arise, Kel'Thuzad, and serve the Lich King once again!

Kel'Thuzad is reborn, but, not as a necromancer, as a Lich.

Kel'Thuzad I am reborn, as promised!  The Lich King has granted me eternal
life!

Arthas I've upheld my end of the bargain, Lich.  Are you ready to tell me
about the dreadlords now?

Kel'Thuzad Certainly, but not here.  They have eyes and ears everywhere.
We'll talk where it's safe.

The Revelation

Three days later in the Alterac Mountains, the undead army flies through the
burning remains of the once wintered town.  The time for disclosure has come.

Arthas So, you're not upset about me killing you that one time?

Kel'Thuzad Don't be foolish.  The Lich King told me how our encounter would
end.

Arthas The Lich King knew that I would kill you?

Kel'Thuzad Of course.  He chose you to be his champion long before the Scourge
even began.

Arthas If he's so all knowing, then how can the dreadlords control him like
they do?

Kel'Thuzad They are agents of the ones who created our master; the fiery lords
of the Burning Legion.

Arthas What is this Legion?

Kel'Thuzad It is a vast demonic army that has consumed countless worlds beyond
our own.  Now, it comes to set this world to the flame.  Our master was created
to pave the way to its arrival.  The dreadlords were sent to make sure that he
succeeded.

Arthas So the plague in Lordaeron, the citadels in Northrend, the slaughtering
of the elves... it was all just to prepare for some huge demonic invasion?

Kel'Thuzad Yes, In time, you will find that our entire history has been shaped
by the coming conflict.  Now come, we have much work to do.

Chapter Six Blackrock & Roll, Too!

The next morning, near a Blackrock clan encampment, Kel'Thuzad and Arthas meet
to discuss phase two.

Arthas Isn't it time you told me about the second phase of the plan, lich?

Kel'Thuzad Certainly.  The first phase of the Lich King's plan was to engineer
the Scourge, which would eradicate any group that might resist the Legion's
arrival.

Arthas Like the forces of Lordaeron... and the high elves.

Kel'Thuzad Exactly.  The second phase it to actually summon the demon lord who
will spark the invasion.

Arthas So, where are we going now?

Kel'Thuzad There is a nearby encampment of Blackrock Orcs who maintain a
functional demon gate.  I must use the gate to commune with the demon lord and
receive his instructions.

As the undead approach, the Orcs feel they are the ones serving the legion, and
attack.

Blademaster We Orcs are the true servants of the burning legion!  These
mindless undead are weak... impure!

Kel'Thuzad Your people failed their task, savage.  You, too, must be scourged
from the world.

An orc hero drops a tome of demon lore, which Arthas picks up and questions.

Arthas I've encountered these demon-worshipping Orcs before.  How do they fit
into all this?

Kel'Thuzad That, young one, is a very complicated matter.  Suffice it to say
they no longer hold any favor with the Legion.

Once they Orcs are dealt with, Arthas and Kel'Thuzad approach the demon gate.

Kel'Thuzad I call upon thee, Archimonde!  Your humble servant seeks an
audience!

Archimonde You called my name, puny lich, and I have come.  You are
Kel'Thuzad, are you not?

Kel'Thuzad Yes, great one.  I am the summoner.

Archimonde Very well, then.  There is a special tome you must find... the only
remaining spellbook of Medivh, the Last Guardian.  Only his lost incantations
are powerful enough to bring me into your world.

Kel'Thuzad Where should we search for it, great one?

Archimonde Seek out the mortal city of Dalaran.  It is there that the tome is
kept.  At twilight, three days from now, you will begin the summoning.

Chapter Seven The Siege of Dalaran

Arthas' army approaches the Mage Capital of Dalaran.  His army sets up a camp
and he goes to the castle entrance to deliver an ultimatum.

Arthas Wizards of the Kirin Tor!  I am Arthas, first of the Lich King's death
knights!  I demand that you open your gates and surrender to the might of the
Scourge!

Antonidas Greetings, Prince Arthas.  How fares your noble father?

Arthas Lord Antonidas.  There's no need to be snide.

Antonidas We've prepared for your coming, Arthas.  My brethren and I have
erected auras that will destroy any undead that pass through them.

Arthas Your petty magics will not stop me, Antonidas.

Antonidas Pull your troops back, or we will be forced to unleash our full
powers against you.  Make your choice, death knight.

Kel'Thuzad I sense that three separate wizards are maintaining these auras.
If you find and kill them, the auras will disperse.

While under an aura, the undead degenerate quickly.  However, the Archmages who
maintain them are a rather low level and die quite quickly from Arthas' wrath.
Eventually, Arthas will reach Antonidas, who maintains the final aura.

Antonidas It pains me to even look at you, Arthas.

Arthas I'll be happy to end your torment, old man.  I told you that your
magics could not stop me.

Arthas kills Antonidas, and walks with Kel'Thuzad to the spellbook of Medivh.

Arthas The spellbook is all yours, lich.  Let's take it an leave before the
wizards amass for their final attack.

Kel'Thuzad Indeed.  I will begin summoning Lord Archimonde at sunset.

Chapter Eight Under the Burning Sky.

An hour later, as the sun begins to set Arthas has set up defenses around a
circle of power, where Kel'Thuzad will perform the ritual.  The humans have
rallied and are approaching.

Arthas The circle of power has been prepared per your instructions, lich.  Are
you ready to begin the summoning?

Kel'Thuzad Nearly.  I've been reading through Medivh's spellbook.  His
knowledge of demons alone is staggering.  I suspect he was far more powerful
than anyone ever realized.

Tichondrius appears.

Tichondrius Not powerful enough to escape death, that is for certain.  Suffice
to say, the work he began, we will finish... today.  Let the summoning
commence.

As Kel'Thuzad gets closer to finishing the summoning, several units will fall
from the sky to aid Arthas.  After a while, Kel'Thuzad will complete the
ritual.

Kel'Thuzad Come forth, Lord Archimonde!  Enter this world and let us bask in
your power!

Archimonde appears.

Archimonde Tremble, mortals, and despair!  Doom has come to this world!  You
have done well, little lich.  My plan worked perfectly.

Tichondrius Lord Archimonde, all the preparations have been made.

Archimonde Very well, Tichondrius.  Since the Lich King is of no further use
to me, you dreadlords will now command the Scourge.

Tichondrius As you wish, Lord Archimonde.

Archimonde Soon, I will order the invasion to begin.  But first, I will make
an example of these paltry wizards... by crushing their city into the ashes of
history.

Arthas This has got to be a joke!  What happens to us now?

Kel'Thuzad Be patient, young death knight.  The Lich King foresaw this as
well.  You may yet have a part to play in his grand design.

Cinematic

Archimonde designs a rather good replica of Dalaran in the sands outside of the
great city.  As he crushes part of the replica, the actual city gets damaged.
Soon, the city is destroyed.  Archimonde's example complete.

End undead campaign.
Start orc campaign.

Chapter One Landfall.

Thrall has led his people west over the great sea as the Prophet requested.  It
has been several weeks, but they have made it.  Their fleet broken by the
elements, the Orcs venture inland.

Grunt Warchief, our ship sustained heavy damage when we passed through the
raging maelstrom.  It's unsalvageable.

Thrall I knew it.  Can we confirm our location?  Is this Kalimdor?

Grunt We traveled due west, as you instructed.  This should be it.

Thrall Very well.  Has there been any sign of Grom Hellscream or the other
ships?

Grunt No, warchief.  Not since we got separated.

Thrall Hmmm.  Prepare to move out.  If our comrades did make it here, we
should be able to find them along the coast.

Along the way, Thrall sees many centaurs hunting down pig faced people.  He
notes a large centaur army amassing.  There is also no sign of Grom Hellscream.
Before long, a centaur party attacks Thrall.

Troll Headhunter The horse men are charging!  Defend yourselves!

Thrall Lok-Tar!  Lok-Tar!

A leader of the pig faces, Cairne Bloodhoof arrives.

Cairne Bloodhoof I am Cairne, chief of the Bloodhoof Tauren.  You greenskins
fight with both savagery and valor.  I am intrigued.

Thrall I am Thrall, and these are my brethren, the Orcs.  We've come seeking
the destiny promised to us.

Cairne Bloodhoof [Laugh] Seeking destiny?  It will find you in time, young
one.  However, there is an Oracle far to the north which might be able to--

Thrall North?  But there's an army of horse men marching north.

Cairne Bloodhoof What?  No!  My village is in danger!

Thrall and Cairne make haste to his village.  They arrive just as the first
centaurs do.  After a long battle Thrall and the Orcs have protected the
village.

Thrall Your tribe is safe, old one.

Cairne Bloodhoof Thanks to you, young warchief.  But the centaur drove off all
the game in this region, and I cannot allow my people to starve.  Soon, we must
head north to the verdant grasslands of Mulgore.

Thrall And you fear the marauders will overtake you.

Cairne Bloodhoof Yes.  The devils' speed cannot be matched upon the plains.

Thrall Well, if you tell us how to teach the Oracle you spoke of, then my
brethren and I will escort you on your march.

Cairne Bloodhoof I am intrigued by you and your people, young Thrall.  You are
more than welcome to join us.

Chapter Two The Long March

Thrall and Cairne have assembled their forces and a caravan to move Cairne's
supplies.

Thrall This land is rugged and beautiful, much like the place from which my
people originally come.

Cairne Bloodhoof Yes.  We tauren have always held a great respect for the
works of the Earth Mother.  There are far worse fates than living freely upon
the open plains, young warchief.

Thrall Perhaps.  But my people deserve a land to call their own, Cairne.

Grunt Warchief, we've spotted a herd of marauders bearing down on us!

Thrall Cairne, the kodos are overburdened and must rest.  Why don't you remain
here and protect the caravan while we search for a suitable oasis?

Cairne Bloodhoof Ha!  There's no need to coddle me, boy. I may be old, but I'm
not helpless.

Thrall enters several of his own Orcs on the way to these oases.  Cairne
follows with the kodos at a distance.  Soon, Thrall will have reached the third
oasis.  However, a large pack of centaurs attacks from higher ground.

Thrall Cairne!  The caravan will never make it in time!

Cairne Bloodhoof Let the fury of the Earth Mother deal with these wretches as
they deserve!

Cairne stomps on the ground causing a massive crevasse to form in the ground.
The centaurs are effectively cut off from the Orcs and taurens.

Cairne Bloodhoof They will trouble us no more.  And you, young warchief, are
free to continue your quest.

Thrall To the Oracle.  What is it?

Cairne Bloodhoof Legends say that it saw the strands of fate as they were
woven by the Earth Mother.  It alone can show you your destiny.

Thrall Where will I find it?

Cairne Bloodhoof Far to the north, near the shadowy base of Mount Hyjal, lies
Stonetalon Peak.  You will find the Oracle within the peak's hollow.  I will
send my finest kodos to aid you in your journey.

Thrall Thank you, Cairne.  I will not forget you.

Cairne Bloodhoof Go with honor, young warchief.  May the Earth Mother smile
upon you.

Intermission The Wreckage of Lordaeron

While the Orcs are busy trying to find destiny, Archimonde is having fun
smashing Lordaeron.

Tichondrius Hail, mighty Mannoroth.  How goes the invasion?

Mannoroth Bah!  These frail humans offer no real resistance.

Tichondrius Then the Scourge did its job well, unlike some others I could
name.

Mannoroth Do not mock me, dreadlord.  I am aware of the Orcs' failure.  When I
find them, I will discipline them myself!

Tichondrius Yes, actually, that's why I've come here.  I thought you might
like to know that the Orcs are no longer here.

Mannoroth What?  Are you certain?

Tichondrius Certain as ever, Mannoroth.  My agents, at least, are always
dependable.  They tell me that the Orcs have landed on Kalimdor.

Mannoroth Kalimdor?  But what could they be--  Bah!  The Orcs are mine by
right, and I will claim them, wherever they choose to run!

Archimonde teleports in.

Archimonde And you are mine, Mannoroth!  You would do well to remember that
fact.  We will watch the wayward Orcs and wait.  Despite their failure, they
may still prove useful to us.

Chapter Three Cry of the Warsong

Five days latter at the foothills of the Stonetalon Mountains, Thrall and his
forces continue on their journey to find the Oracle.

Grunt Warchief, we've been trudging through this wasteland for a week and
nothing to fight but centaurs and pig-men!  We need real enemies to test our
mettle!

Thrall Yes, boredom and the beating sun have put us all on edge.  But we must
push on!  All will be made clear once we meet the Oracle.

Grunt Look!  It's the Warsong clan!  And they're battling humans!

Thrall What?  Lok-Tar, warriors.  Hellscream needs help!

Archmage Wretched Orcs!  How dare you follow us to this land!

Grom Hellscream Save your breath, human!  You'll need it to scream when I
start tearing off your limbs!

The Orcs defeat the humans small camp.

Thrall Grom, what was this about?  And how the hell did these humans get here,
anyway?

Grom Hellscream Same way we did, little brother.  Apparently, a frail girl
named Proudmoore leads them.  Her forces have cordoned off the pass that leads
to the north.

Thrall Well, we must make it through the pass, despite her.  I'll send our
hunters to scout the area while we establish a base. Until then, the humans are
not to be touched!

Grom Hellscream Whatever you say, Warchief.

The scouts report that it may be possible for Thrall to slip by the humans, but
Grom's lust for battle sends the Orcs in early.  He attacks one of the human
bases.

Grunt Warchief, the Warsong clan is attacking the humans, despite your orders!

Thrall Damn it!  There's nothing to do now but fight!  Tighten up our
defenses, I'll deal with Hellscream later.

After fighting the humans, Thrall reaches a goblin merchant who sells him some
zeppelins, which will allow Thrall to bypass the next wave of humans.

Thrall With these, we can reach Stonetalon Peak by morning.

Grom Hellscream A true warrior would simple take the pass from the humans.

Thrall Have you lost what's left of your mind, Grom?  I gave you a direct
order to leave the humans alone!  What the hell is wrong with you?

Grom Hellscream Don't lecture me, pup!  The wretches deserved death!  Don't
you feel it, Thrall?  It's like the old days... like the demons are near.

Thrall I don't know what's come over you and your men, but this bloodlust is a
liability that I can't afford.

Grom Hellscream I'm sorry, Thrall.  You're right.  I... I can handle it.

Thrall I can't take that chance, Grom.  Take your clan into the northern
forest and build us a settlement.  I'll come and find you after we've reached
the Oracle.

Chapter Four The Spirits of Ashenvale

Thrall and his forces are moving towards the Oracle.  Hellscream and another
large contingent of Orcs are setting up a base camp in the Ashenvale forest...

Grom Hellscream Damn Thrall for sending us away!  He chooses to use his
greatest warriors for manual labor?  He'll be lost without me.

Grunt Chieftain, there's something strange about these woods.  It's too...
quiet.  Almost like we're being watched.

Grom Hellscream Are you all afraid of spirits now?  There is nothing here but
ancient trees and shadow.

Grunt You hear that?  This place is haunted!  I fear no living enemy, but my
axe cannot cleave fleshless spirits!

Grom Hellscream Still your tongue and get to work!  The warchief's new
settlement will require a great deal of lumber.  This section of the forest
must be cleared!

The Orcs were in fact being watched, by an ancient race of elves.  Unlike the
elves of the human lands, these elves are all female.  Their bases are made of
large trees.  Grom, upon destroying some of these, utilizes them for the new
settlement.  Before long, the Orc lumber stockpiles are nearly full.  Grom
issues the order to begin constructing a larger settlement for Thrall's forces.

Intermission The Blood of Mannoroth

Later that evening, in the nearby Moonglades of Cenarius, Mannoroth and
Tichondrius teleport in.  Mannoroth slaughters some nearby wildlife.

Mannoroth Ashenvale forest, After ten thousand years, I still recognized this
cursed place!  This is the vale of our ancient enemy, the night elves' demigod,
Cenarius.

Tichondrius Yes, Lord Archimonde demands that Cenarius be destroyed before we
launch the invasion of Kalimdor.

Mannoroth I would relish the chance to face him again in combat, but he is
crafty and rarely appears in the open.

Tichondrius Fateful as it sounds, your pet Orcs have recently despoiled these
forestlands and incurred his wrath.  Lord Archimonde and I believe that the
Orcs are capable of killing Cenarius for us.

Mannoroth They would have little chance against Cenarius.  If memory serves,
his powers were quite formidable.

Tichondrius Yes, but so are yours.  The blood pact that you made with the Orcs
long ago still binds them to you.  You need only recharge their energies.

Mannoroth Just what are you suggesting, dreadlord?

Tichondrius Spill your blood into this pool.  Its corruption will lure the
Orcs to it, and once they've tasted your blood again, they will be unstoppable!

Mannoroth spills his blood into the pool, laughing at the inevitable victory it
will bring.

Chapter Five The Hunter of Shadows.

The next morning in the woods of Ashenvale, Grom Hellscream has succeeded in
creating a large orc base.  However, the destruction of the forest has angered
Cenarius.

Cenarius Who dares defile this ancient land?  Who dares the wrath of Cenarius
and the night elves?

Cenarius casts several spells, many trees turn into warriors.

Grunt The forest is coming alive!  We're under attack!

Cenarius Let battle be joined!

Cenarius and the night elves knock down most of the orc base, leaving Grom
Hellscream just a small encampment on the far side of the vale.  Cenarius uses
another spell and all the cut down trees are instantly replenished with new
ones.

Cenarius Now, my warriors, cleanse these brutes from the wilds!  I will watch
over you from the forest.

It was clear from his initial attack, that Cenarius is all but immune to orc
attacks.  A Troll Witch Doctor senses great power from a pool to the north.
Hellscream heads over that way.  The pool is guarded by a group of Satyrs.

Satyr Foul Orcs!  The burning masters charged us with protecting this well.
You are unworthy of drinking from these dark waters.

Grom Hellscream I don't know what you are or who you serve, but no one bars my
way!

Witch Doctor This pool emanates great power, but I smell the stench of a
demons curse about it!

Grom Hellscream I am cursed already!  If I must drink from these waters to
defeat Cenarius, then I will.

Grunt No!  That goes against everything the warchief teaches us!  We can't let
rage overcome us again!

Grom Hellscream No, warrior.  We must embrace it as never before!  We must
become the vessels of destruction that we were meant to be!

Hellscream drinks from the pool.  He turns red and his size increases.

Grom Hellscream Yes!  I feel the power once again!  Come, my warriors!  Drink
from the dark waters and you will be reborn!

With their renewed demonic power, the Orcs are able to hurt and eventually kill
the demigod Cenarius.

Grom Hellscream The demigod has fallen.  The Warsong is supreme!

Mannoroth appears.

Mannoroth Hello again, Grommash.

Grom Hellscream Mannoroth!  It... can't be.

Mannoroth I've come to bring you and your brethren back into the fold.  Though
you Orcs failed the Burning Legion before, you will now serve us once again!

Grom Hellscream No!  We... are free!

Mannoroth Stupid, pitiful creature.  I am the rage in your heart.  I am the
fury of your thoughts.  I alone empowered you to bring chaos to this world, and
by the endless void, you shall!

Chapter Six Where Wyverns Dare

At the base of Stonetalon Peak, Thrall and his forces have run into a bit of a
dead end.

Orc Scout Warchief, we scouted the peak as you ordered.  The humans have
entrenched their fortifications all the way up to the summit.

Thrall What are they up to?  If they're looking to pick a fight, they've had
ample opportunities before this!

Cairne Bloodhoof and his taurens approach.

Cairne Bloodhoof Ish-ne-alo-por-ah, young warchief!

Thrall Cairne!  What are you doing here?

Cairne Bloodhoof Our debt to you Orcs can only be repaid with blood.  We've
come to help you reach the oracle.  However, those metal-clad pinkskins look
like trouble.

Thrall Those pinkskins are called humans.  They are our enemies from across
the sea.  They seem intent on keeping us from the peak.

Cairne Bloodhoof Hmmm.  The Oracle's wisdom belongs to us all.  Perhaps the
wyverns that live nearby can be of use to us.  They have no love for hostile
intruders!

Taking Cairne's advise, Thrall searches for these wyverns, but when he spots a
pack, they're under attack.

Cairne Bloodhoof The harpies have enslaved the wyverns!

Harpy Queen Be warned, old fool.  Stonetalon Peak is ours.  Neither these
brutes nor the humans will leave this place alive.  Attack, my sisters!

Cairne Bloodhoof believes the wyverns will help should Thrall be able to free
them.  He agrees.  Eventually, several caged wyverns are freed by Thrall.

Cairne Bloodhoof There!  These proud beasts will now aid us in reaching the
summit.

With their aid, the human base falls and Thrall is able to march to the
entrance of the Oracle's lair.  There is a problem, though, a small human force
gets in just before him.  Jaina is leading the expedition.

Cairne Bloodhoof Hold, warchief.

Thrall That's the young sorceress Grom told me about.  It appears she seeks
the oracle as well.

Cairne Bloodhoof Be wary, young one.  That cave is the perfect spot for an
ambush.

Thrall Don't worry, Cairne.  I was raised by the humans.  I know their tricks
and stratagems.  There's no way that I'll let them stop me from reaching the
Oracle.

Chapter Seven The Oracle

Minutes later, Thrall and Cairne head into the cave under Stonetalon Peak.

Cairne Bloodhoof The path cuts off in different directions.

Thrall Either of those caverns could stretch for miles.  Perhaps we should
split up?

Cairne Bloodhoof Very well.  Be careful, young one.  There's no telling what
ancient creatures lie within the mountain's depths.

Thrall I will, Cairne.  Good luck.

Thrall is the first to encounter anything.  He finds several odd gates.  One of
them speaks to him.

Aszune I am Aszune, ancient princess of the moon-children.  None may pass
until my heart is returned to me.

Thrall finds her heart in another chamber, and gives it to her.

Thrall Here is your heart, Aszune.  Now grant us passage to the Oracle.

The passage leads to another apparent dead end.  There is an area across a pit
of lava, but no apparent way across it.

Thrall Apparently, this is some kind of spectral bridge.  But the enchanted
gemstone that powers it is missing.  With any luck, Cairne will find it for us.

As luck would have it, Cairne has found a magical gemstone.

Cairne Bloodhoof The gemstone has an inscription on its base.  Ah... this is
the spirit stone of Stonetalon Chasm.  If the legends are true, then this will
activate the spirit bridge that leads to the Oracle!

Cairne makes his way to the bridge area where Thrall is.  He holds up the
gemstone and a bridge appears.

Cairne Bloodhoof Ah, the Spirits' Bridge... Just as the legends described it.
Now, young warchief, the path to the Oracle is revealed!

Thrall and Cairne cross the bridge.  Jaina and some of her human army are
waiting in this area as well.

Jaina Orcs.  I knew that we were being followed.  Defend yourselves!

The Prophet Stop!  There will be no violence in this place.

Thrall That voice.  You're not Oracle!  You're the prophet!

The Prophet Very perceptive, son of Durotan.  I am the prophet.  And, now that
I've lured you all here, I will tell you what destiny holds.

Thrall What the hell is going on here?

The Prophet Thrall, this is Jaina Proudmoore, leader of the survivors of
Lordaeron.

Thrall Survivors?  What are you talking about?

The Prophet The invasion of the Burning Legion has begun!  Lordaeron has
already fallen and now the demons come to invade Kalimdor!  Only together,
united against the shadow, will you be able to save this world from the flame.

Jaina Unite with them?  Are you mad?

The Prophet Have you heard nothing that I've said?  The Legion comes to undo
history and end all life!  Thrall, your friend Hellscream has already fallen
under the demons' influence.  Soon he and your whole race will be lost forever!

Thrall No... I'll die before I let that happen!

The Prophet Then you must rescue him immediately!  He is the key to the
destiny I promised you.  However, you will need help.

Jaina Wait!  This is insane!  You can't possibly expect me to--

The Prophet Destiny is at hand, young sorceress.  The time to choose has come.
For the fate of all who live, humanity must join forces with the Horde.

Chapter Eight By Demons Be Driven

Three days later, near the edge of the Barrens, Thrall, Jaina and Cairne
prepare for the daunting task ahead.

Cairne Bloodhoof If the prophet was correct, then the Warsong encampment lies
just over the ridge.  We should ready ourselves for battle.

Thrall I know, Cairne.  It's just that I never thought I'd live to see the
day... when I had to fight my own people.

Jaina Just remember, Thrall, with this soul gem you can capture your friend
Hellscream's spirit without hurting him.  But you need to bring it back to my
base immediately, so we can free Grom from the demons' control.

Thrall I... appreciate your help, Miss Proudmoore.  Yet another day I thought
I'd never live to see.

Jaina That makes two of us.  I'll return to my base and aid you as best I can.
Good luck... gentlemen.

Jaina exits to her base.

Cairne Bloodhoof The spirits rage around you, young warchief.  They sense your
anguish... your grief.

Thrall Hellscream is like a brother to me, Cairne.  But he and his clan have
fallen under the demons' influence.  If I can't save him, then my people might
be damned for all time.

As Thrall nears Groms' location, the skies turn red with fire.

Jaina Thrall!  The skies are burning!

Thrall This is no natural storm!  Blessed ancestors,,, Everyone brace
yourselves!

Dozens upon dozens of infernals fall to the ground.  They charge in various
directions.

Thrall Fight on, my warriors!  We must reach Hellscream before it's too late!

Thrall finally reaches Grom, who is standing next to a demon gate.

Thrall Grom!  You've got to come with me!

Grom Hellscream And where would you lead me, boy?  Destiny is at hand!  Lord
Mannoroth is our master now.

Thrall Who?  You're not talking sense!

Grom Hellscream Ah, Thrall.  You always believed that the demons corrupted our
race, but that's only half true.  We gave ourselves up willingly on Draenor!
The other chieftains and I... we drank Mannoroth's blood, Thrall.  We brought
this curse upon ourselves!

Thrall You did this... to our people... knowingly?  Arrrgghhh!

Thrall captures Grom in the soul gem and brings it back to the circle of power
near Jaina's base.  Grom is removed from the crystal as several human priests
and orc shaman's exorcise the demons out of him.

Thrall Grom?

Grom Hellscream Thrall... I see clearly now.  I'm... sorry.  I am so sorry.

Thrall To hell with your apologies!  Right now, I need you to help me save our
people!

Grom Hellscream Mannoroth... We must face Mannoroth in the canyon.

Thrall Then let's go.  I don't want to keep the bastard waiting.

Cinematic

Thrall and Grom walk into the canyon to fight the pit lord, Mannoroth.  Due to
the skies burning, the canyon has poor visibility and Mannoroth is well
concealed.

Mannoroth [Laughing] So predictable.  I knew you would come, and I see you
brought the mighty Hellscream.  [Laughs]  His blood is mine, as is your whole
misbegotten race.

Mannoroth appears behind Thrall and Grom, smashing his weapon into the ground.
Mannoroth is huge in comparison to either of the Orcs.

Thrall lets out a shout, smashes his hammer into the ground.  It charges up and
he lets it fly at Mannoroth.  Mannoroth blocks closes his wings around himself
and blocks the hammer.  There is a  huge explosion.

Mannoroth A worthy effort, but futile.

Mannoroth charges at Thrall, knocking him several meters into a nearby rock
face.  Mannoroth laughs.  Grom, having been knocked down as well, reaches for
his axe and gets to his feet.

Mannoroth The boy believed you could be saved, but he didn't know what burns
within your soul.  When in your heart, you know we are the same.

Grom Hellscream Nooooooooo!

Grom charges at Mannoroth, who takes up a defensive pose.  Mannoroth takes the
brunt of the axe in his chest.  The demon energies begin to escape from his
body, within moments they ignite causing a massive explosion which kills
Mannoroth and sends Hellscream flying backwards while burning.  Thrall limps
over to Grom, who lies nearly motionless.

Grom Hellscream Thrall.  The blood haze, has lifted.  The demons fire has
burnt out of my veins.  I... have... freed... myself.

Grom Dies.

Thrall No, old friend.  You've freed us all.

Thrall yells out a loud shout which shakes the canyon.

End Orc Campaign.
Begin Night Elf Campaign.

Chapter One Enemies at the Gate

A combined Human and Orc force continues to move through Ashenvale to ensure
that the demon threat to the planet no longer exists.  However, the Night Elves
are not too happy about this intrusion.  Tyrande Whisperwind, a leader in the
Night Elf ranks, feels these intruders will bring doom to her homeland.  She
stands atop a mountain starring out towards an encampment.  Some of the other
Night Elves are worried about Tyrande.

Shandris Feathermoon Pardon, Priestess, but you've been staring out across
Ashenvale for hours.

Tyrande Whisperwind I sense something dark stirring within the forests,
Shandris.  It feels as if it's heading this way.

Shandris Feathermoon The greenskins who killed Cenarius?

Tyrande Whisperwind Perhaps.  Perhaps something more.

One of her owl scouts flies over the encampment.  A human paladin is in charge.

Duke Lionheart Put your backs into it!  Jaina and the orc warchief expect this
base to be built swiftly!

Footman Bah!  We shouldn't even be here!  Or siding with the Orcs.

Grunt We're here to hunt the remaining demons, human.  You're lucky our goals
are the same.

Duke Lionheart All right, you men!  Mind your business!  Back to work!

Back to Tyrande and Shandris.

Tyrande Whisperwind So, these Orcs and humans presume to run rampant through
our lands?  They will regret ever stepping foot into Ashenvale.  We will
establish a base and deal with these outlanders as they deserve.

Tyrande's forces make quick work of the base, but just as it is finished off,
the nearby stags run off, the sky darkness and begins to spew fire.  Members of
the Burning Legion and undead teleport in.

Grunt It's the undead!  Defend yourselves!

Footman They must have followed us from Lordaeron!

Archer Elune save us!  The dead advance in waves!

With several Abominations running amok, and the skies still pouring fire, it is
clear all the armies of the living are doomed.

Tyrande Whisperwind Quickly, my sisters, back to the trees!  We are no match
for a force this vast.

Chapter Two Daughters of the Moon

Three hours later, in the foothills of Mount Hyjal, Tyrande and her troops are
still running from the undead, who are mowing down the forests just as fast as
Tyrande can get through them.  Archimonde and Tichondrius are near the front
line of pursuit.

Archer The undead are tireless.  There's no way to outrun them!

Tichondrius You see, Lord Archimonde?  We need not fear the night elves.  The
Scourge can--

Tyrande Whisperwind Archimonde... After ten thousand years, how is it
possible?

Archimonde The Legion has returned to consume this world, woman.  And this
time, your troublesome race will not stop us.

Two doom guards kill the two archers near Tyrande.  As they go for her, she
disappears.

Archimonde Fools!  You let her slip away!  [He kills a doom guard].  Find her,
damn you!  Find her and kill her!

They run off, and Tyrande reappears.  The ability to hide is indigenous to most
night elf units when it is nighttime.

Tyrande Whisperwind The day we have long feared has finally come.  The Burning
Legion has returned!  I must cross the river and warn the rest of my sisters
before all is lost!

Tyrande weaves her way through the forest, hiding herself when undead draw
near.  Eventually, before morning, she reaches a night elf base.

Shandris Feathermoon Tyrande!  Praise Elune, you've made it!  The undead
appeared out of nowhere and attacked our village without warning!

Tyrande Whisperwind Ishnu-dal-dieb, Shandris.  We have a greater problem.  The
undead were sent here by the Burning Legion, our ancient enemies of old.
Against such might, we have only one option.  We must awaken the druids.

Chapter Three The Awakening of Stormrage

The next day, on the outskirts of a sacred moonglade where a powerful druid
sleeps, Tyrande and her forces arrive.

Tyrande Whisperwind With Cenarius dead, it falls to us to awaken the druids.
We must recover the demigod's horn from the sacred Moonglade Isle.  Only its
clarion calls can awaken the druids from their slumber.

Archer But, Priestess, the Orcs have established a crude settlement upon the
isle.  We'll need to fight through them to reach Canarius' horn!

Another Night Elf army rushes in.

Huntress Priestess Tyrande, thank Elune we found you.  The undead are
advancing upon the nearby Barrow Dens!  The Dens seem abandoned, but--

Tyrande Whisperwind There is one druid sleeping within them, sister... Furion
Stormrage.  He is the wisest and most powerful of all the druids.  He must be
warned that the Legion has returned!

Huntress Then we'd better hurry.  If they undead overtake his Den before he's
awakened.

Tyrande Whisperwind Let us make haste, my sisters!  All our hopes rest on
Furion's awakening!

After plowing through the orc base, Tyrande must defeat three primal guardians
who protect the horn.  She does.

Tyrande Whisperwind At last!  The horn of Cenarius!  Now we can awake Furion!

Tyrande blows the horn and it echoes throughout the land.  Furion awakens
before the undead reach him.

Furion Stormrage The horn has sounded, and I have come as promised!  I smell
the stench of decay and corruption in our land.  That angers me greatly.

Furion turns some nearby trees into treant warriors.

Furion Stormrage Come forth, you defenders of old!  Crush these invaders as
you did in ages past!

The treants run off and attack the undead.

Chapter Four The Druids Arise

Two days later, in Winterspring Valley, Tyrande and Furion have arrived near
the sleeping area of more druids.

Furion Stormrage It has been a thousand years since I last looked up you,
Tyrande.  I thought of you every moment I roamed through the Emerald Dream.

Tyrande Whisperwind My heart rejoices to see you again, Furion.  But I would
not have awakened you unless the need was urgent.

Furion Stormrage In the Dream, I felt our land being corrupted, just as if it
were my own body.  You were right to awaken me.

Tyrande Whisperwind The Burning Legion has returned, Furion.  Cenarius is
dead, and the outlanders roam freely through our most sacred vales.

Furion Stormrage As was foretold...  No doubt Archimonde will make his way to
Hyjal Summit and attack the World Tree.  If he succeeds in draining the tree's
energies, this world will be doomed.

Tyrande Whisperwind My only thought was to awaken you and the rest of the
druids.  The druids of the talon reside within Barrow Dens at the end of this
valley.  If we can reach them, we may have a chance to stop Archimonde and his
demons!

A nearby pack of humans are battling undead.  Tyrande and Furion rush over to
observe.

Footman That did it, boys!  We've driven them off!  Let's regroup back at the
base and tend to our wounded.

Furion Stormrage So, the outlanders battle against the undead as well?  They
could prove to be powerful allies against Archimonde and his ilk.

Tyrande Whisperwind They are mongrels and nothing more!  They are responsible
for Cenarius' death!  I will be damned before I stand with them.

Furion Stormrage Perhaps you are right, my love.  We will establish our new
settlement here.  Keep your sentries alert.  I doubt that we have seen the last
of the outlanders or the undead.

As Furion and Tyrande search for the druids of the talon, they find the
corruption of the land has spread to his area.

Tyrande Whisperwind No!  The outpost has been corrupted, and the treants have
been driven mad!  They do not deserve this cruel fate!

Satyr Come no further, weakling!  Lord Tichondrius commanded us to kill anyone
attempting to enter this place, and we shall!

Furion Stormrage Pathetic wretches!  It pains me that you once called
yourselves night elves!

Furion and Tyrande succeed in wiping out the corrupted treants and others of
the forest.  They proceed to the Barrow Den.

Furion Stormrage Come forth, druids of the talon!  Let the storm crows fly
once again upon the winds of war!

Furion plays the horn and the druids awake, flying as birds.  One of them
reverts to humanoid form.

Furion Stormrage Ishnu, alah, my brethren.  Kalimdor has need of your powers
once again, for the hour of doom is at hand.

Druid of the Talon We are yours to command, Shan'do Stormrage.

Furion Stormrage Now, we must delve into the earth and rouse the ferocious
druids of the claw from their slumber.

Chapter Five Brothers in Blood

The next morning, in a subterranean Barrow being Mount Hyjal, Tyrande and
Furion bring a small force in looking for the druids of the claw.

Furion Stormrage These Barrow Deeps have remained untouched for nearly three
thousand years.  Still, there is no telling what creatures may have taken up
residence after we sealed these tunnels shut.

Tyrande Whisperwind There is nothing to fear in this place.  The only enemy
that has ever given me pause is now corrupting the lands above us.  Let us be
done with this business and get back to the surface.

Furion Stormrage Agreed.  Just be careful.  There is no telling how the druids
of the claw will react to us after all this time.

Not far into the Barrow, a path guarded by multiple gates splits off.

Tyrande Whisperwind The pathway cuts off to the south, but this doorway looks
promising.

Furion Stormrage Oh, no.  How could I have forgotten?

Tyrande Whisperwind What is behind this door that worries you, my love?

Furion Stormrage This door leads to Illidan's prison, Tyrande.  We should
go... now!

Tyrande Whisperwind Illidan?  It's been ten thousand years!  Could he still be
alive?  We should free him, Furion!  He would be the perfect ally against the
undead and their demon masters!

Furion Stormrage No, Tyrande!  That beast must never be set free!

Tyrande Whisperwind But he is your brother!

Furion Stormrage Be that as it may, he is far too... dangerous.  I forbid it.

Tyrande Whisperwind Only the goddess may forbid me anything.  I will free
Illidan whether you like it or not.

Tyrande rushes through the first gate and closes it behind herself, trapping
Furion and most of the army they brought with on the original path.
Grudgingly, Furion continues to search for the sleeping druids.  He finds them,
except, they aren't sleeping.

Furion Stormrage Ah... the druids of the claw are awake already!  Come, my
brothers!  We have much to do!

The druids of the claw attack the druids of the talon who approach them.  The
claw druids are in bear form, to counter this, the druids of the talon get them
in a cyclone and keep them suspended in the air.

Furion Stormrage What in...  They have lost themselves to their animal
aspects.  They are mindless and feral!  The horn's call might work, but it
would reach only a few of them in this part of the cavern.

Instead, Furion decides, he needs to get deeper in the cavern to awaken them
all.  However, he has to sneak his way past several druids, entangling them
whenever they pursue.  Eventually, he reaches a central point and blows the
horn of cenarius.

Druid of the Claw Shan'do Stormrage!  I don't know what came over us.  It's
been so long since we remembered who we were.

Furion Stormrage All is well, thero-shan.  I have need of you and your mighty
brethren once again.  After these many ages, the Burning Legion has returned,
and only our combined strength can drive them back.

Druid of the Claw Then we druids of the claw are yours to command, Shan'do
Stormrage.

Meanwhile, on the other side of the locked gate, Tyrande and a small amount of
night elves proceed to find Illidan.

Tyrande Whisperwind I cannot go back.  Goddess grant that Furion was wrong.

Elder Watcher Your quest is foolhardy!  Even your goddess has condemned the
one you seek to free!

Tyrande makes her way to the cell in which Illidan is held.  It is protected
well.

Keeper of the Grove Hold, Priestess!  This place is forbidden, even to one
such as you.  There is a terrible evil here that must remain chained beneath
the earth.

Tyrande Whisperwind Illidan was considered a great hero once, I believe he
will become one again.

Keeper of the Grove Madness!  You would doom us all by freeing the betrayer!

Tyrande defeats all the guards and approaches the cell, she sees a shadowy
figure.

Tyrande Whisperwind Illidan!  Is that you?

Illidan Stormrage Tyrande... it is your voice!  After all these ages spent in
darkness, your voice is like the pure light of the moon upon my mind.

Tyrande Whisperwind The Legion has returned, Illidan.  Your people have need
of you once more.

Illidan shatters the cell he was being held in.  Makes you wonder why he
willingly stayed in it for ten thousand years.

Illidan Stormrage Because I once cared for you, Tyrande, I will hunt down the
demons.  But I will never owe our people anything!

Tyrande Whisperwind Then let us hurry back to the surface!  The demons'
corruption spreads with every second we waste!

Tyrande and Illidan head back to the entrance of the Barrow, they run into
Furion with his newly awoken druids.

Tyrande Whisperwind Furion!

Illidan Stormrage It has been an eternity, brother.  An eternity spent in
darkness!

Furion Stormrage Illidan!  You were sentenced to pay for your sins, nothing
more!

Illidan Stormrage And who were you to judge me?  We fought the demons side by
side, if you recall.

Tyrande Whisperwind Enough of this, both of you!  What is done is done!  My
love, with Illidan's help, we will drive the demons back once again and save
what is left of our beloved land!

Furion Stormrage Have you even considered the cost, Tyrande?  This betrayer's
aid may doom us all before the end.  I will have nothing of this.

Chapter Six A Destiny of Flame and Sorrow

The following evening, deep in the corrupted forests of Felwood Illidan
contemplates his new life.  Little does he know, Arthas is watching him from a
nearby hill.

Illidan Stormrage I am free after ten thousand years, yet still my own brother
thinks I am a villain!  I'll show him my true power!  I'll show him that the
demons have no hold over me!

Arthas Are you certain of that, demon hunter?  Are you certain your will is
your own?

Illidan Stormrage You reek of death, human.  You'll regret approaching me.

Arthas Come then, you'll find we're evenly matched.

Illidan charges, but neither are able to wound the other.

Illidan Stormrage We could go on fighting like this forever.  What is it you
truly want?

Arthas The dreadlord who commands this undead army is called Tichondrius.  He
controls a powerful warlock artifact called the Skull of Gul'dan.  It is
responsible for corrupting these forests.

Illidan Stormrage And you wish for me to steal it.  Why?

Arthas Let's just say I have no love for Tichondrius, and the lord I serve
would... benefit from the Legion's downfall.

Illidan Stormrage Why should I believe anything you say, little human?

Arthas My master sees all, demon hunter.  He knows that you've sought power
your whole life.  Now it lies within your grasp!  Seize it, and your enemies
will be undone.

Arthas leaves.  Illidan decides he will need this power to prove Furion wrong.
He fights his way to the Skull of Gul'dan.

Illidan Stormrage Now at least the demons will no longer corrupt the forests.
But, if I destroy the skull and claim its powers as my own, I will become even
stronger than any of Archimonde's lieutenants.  Yes... the power should be
mine!

Illidan destroys the skull.  It transforms him into a demon.

Illidan Stormrage Now I am complete!

Illidan rushes over to Tichondrius and rips a hole through his army.

Tichondrius What?  Who are... you?

Illidan Stormrage Let's see how confident you are against one of your own
kind, dreadlord!

Illidan slays Tichondrius.  Moments later, Furion and Tyrande arrive.  The
ground is shaking.

Furion Stormrage Foul demon!  What have you done with my brother?

Illidan Stormrage It is I, Furion.  This is what I've become.

Tyrande Whisperwind No!  Illidan, how could you?

Illidan Stormrage The leader of the undead has been destroyed, and the forests
will heal in time.

Furion Stormrage At the cost of your soul?  You are no brother of mine!
Begone from this place and never set foot in our lands again!

Illidan Stormrage So be it... brother.

Illidan runs off.

Interlude The Last Guardian.

Two days later, Furion and Tyrande are standing in a tranquil area of the
forest.  The prophet flies over in his raven form.  Tyrande grows impatient.

Tyrande Whisperwind We have no time for this, Furion!  What are we doing out
here?

Furion Stormrage Last night in a dream, a great raven spoke to me and summoned
me to this place.

Thrall and Jaina arrive together as well.

Thrall We were summoned here as well.

Furion Stormrage Who are you, outlanders?

Thrall I am Thrall, son of Durotan.  Warchief of the Horde.

Jaina And I am Jaina Proudmoore, leader of the human survivors of Lordaeron.

Tyrande Whisperwind You are not welcome here!

The prophet lands and turns human.

The Prophet Peace, Priestess.  They've come to aid you against the Legion.

Furion Stormrage It was you in my dream!  But who are you to make such an
offer to us?

The Prophet I... and the reason for the Legion's return.  Years ago, I brought
the Orcs into this world, and by doing so, I opened a path for the demons as
well.  For my sins, I was murdered by those who I cared for the most.  Despite
my death, war raged across the lands of the east for many long years, leaving
entire kingdoms devastated in its wake.  Now, at long last, I have returned to
set things right.  I... am Medivh, the Last Guardian.  I tell you now, the only
chance for this world is to unite in arms against the enemies of all who live!

Chapter Seven Twilight of the Gods

The next morning, the Orcs and Humans set up defenses at the bottom of the
Hyjal summit, while the Night Elves stay near the top, preparing for the
Legion's coming invasion.  Tyrande, Furion, and Thrall meet one last time to
discuss their plan.  Jaina is late, as usual, but teleports in.

Jaina I'm sorry I'm late.  It's just as we feared.  Archimonde and his doom
guard are making their way towards the summit.  He'll be here any moment.

Furion Stormrage Ten thousand years ago we night elves defeated the Burning
Legion.  Though the rest of the world was shattered, we were left free to live
out our immortal lives in peace, bound to the World Tree.  We are its
protectors, and through it we were granted immortality and power over nature.
Now, at last, it is time we gave that power back.

Tyrande Whisperwind You realize that we will age as these mortals do.  Our
powers will wane in time.

Furion Stormrage If pride gives us pause, my love, then perhaps we have lived
long enough already.  I will proceed to the summit and prepare our defense
there.  Whatever comes, my love, remember... our bond is eternal.

Furion runs over to a gate and begins some form of summoning spell.  At the
bottom of the mountain, Archimonde appears.

Archimonde Hear me, night elves!  The time for reckoning has come!

Jaina [To Tyrande] If you can provide our bases with support and keep us from
being overwhelmed, Thrall and I will delay Archimonde's ascent!

Tyrande Whisperwind Your plan is a bold one, girl.  Perhaps I have misjudged
you outlanders.  May Elune shine upon you!

The goal is for the three armies to stall Archimonde for 45 minutes, while
Furion prepares.  Jaina's base is the closest to Archimonde.  While the humans
fight valiantly, eventually the Legion's overwhelms them and builds its new
base there.  Archimonde approaches Jaina, who stands directly in front of him
blocking the way.

Archimonde You are very brave to stand against me, little human.  If only your
countrymen had been as bold, I would have had more fun scouring your wretched
nations from the world!

Jaina Is talking all you demons do?

Jaina teleports out of her base.

Archimonde Stormrage!  Show yourself!  Or do you intend to have mortal girls
do all your fighting for you?

Thrall's base suffers a similar fate in time.  Archimonde pins Thrall against a
forest, as his troops take down Thrall's base and assemble their own.

Archimonde You Orcs are weak and hardly worth the effort!  I wonder why
Mannoroth even bothered with you!

Thrall Our spirit is stronger than you know, demon!  If we are to fall, then
so be it!  At least now... we are free!

Thrall teleports out as well.

Archimonde The wretched little whelp actually hurt me... Are there none left
to stand against the legion?  This is almost too easy!  If I'd known that this
mortal resistance would be so weak, I would have launched this invasion
centuries ago!

The Night Elves hold out for the rest of the time Furion needed, but quickly
fall after that.  Archimonde levels the night elf base.  Furion watches from
afar.

Furion Stormrage Archimonde's victory here has made him overconfident.  He
will not see the trap that I laid for him until it is too late.

Archimonde arrives at the gate.

Archimonde At last, the way to the World Tree is clear!  Witness the end, you
mortals!  The final hour has come!

Tyrande runs up to Furion's watching point.

Tyrande Whisperwind The outlanders held him back as long as they could.  Were
you successful in planning the summit's defenses?

Furion Stormrage Yes.  Now our victory is assured.

Archimonde reaches the World Tree and starts climbing its massive roots which
cover the entire vale.  He reaches the trunk at last.  From afar, Furion plays
the Horn of Cenarius.  The entire mountain, which was covered in wisps
harvesting trees, leaves the tree and swarms Archimonde.  Their energies harm
him to the point death.  He explodes.  The trees covering the mountain are all
singed, the mountain itself looks dying.  The World Tree appears to be in tact,
but badly damaged, however, the roots are expanding.

The Prophet/Medivh The roots will heal in time, as will the entire world.  The
sacrifices have been made.  Just as the Orcs, Humans and Night Elves discarded
their old hatreds and stood united against a common foe.  So did nature herself
rise up, to banish the shadow forever.  As for me, I came back to ensure that
there would be a future, to teach the world it no longer needed guardians.  The
hope for future generations has always resided in mortal hands.  And now that
my task is done, I will take my place amongst the legends... of the past.

The Time Traveller (for so it will be convenient to speak of him)
was expounding a recondite matter to us. His grey eyes shone and
twinkled, and his usually pale face was flushed and animated. The
fire burned brightly, and the soft radiance of the incandescent
lights in the lilies of silver caught the bubbles that flashed and
passed in our glasses. Our chairs, being his patents, embraced and
caressed us rather than submitted to be sat upon, and there was that
luxurious after-dinner atmosphere when thought roams gracefully
free of the trammels of precision. And he put it to us in this
way--marking the points with a lean forefinger--as we sat and lazily
admired his earnestness over this new paradox (as we thought it)
and his fecundity.

'You must follow me carefully. I shall have to controvert one or two
ideas that are almost universally accepted. The geometry, for
instance, they taught you at school is founded on a misconception.'

'Is not that rather a large thing to expect us to begin upon?'
said Filby, an argumentative person with red hair.

'I do not mean to ask you to accept anything without reasonable
ground for it. You will soon admit as much as I need from you. You
know of course that a mathematical line, a line of thickness nil,
has no real existence. They taught you that? Neither has a
mathematical plane. These things are mere abstractions.'

'That is all right,' said the Psychologist.

'Nor, having only length, breadth, and thickness, can a cube have a
real existence.'

'There I object,' said Filby. 'Of course a solid body may exist. All
real things--'

'So most people think. But wait a moment. Can an instantaneous
cube exist?'

'Don't follow you,' said Filby.

'Can a cube that does not last for any time at all, have a real
existence?'

Filby became pensive. 'Clearly,' the Time Traveller proceeded, 'any
real body must have extension in four directions: it must have
Length, Breadth, Thickness, and--Duration. But through a natural
infirmity of the flesh, which I will explain to you in a moment, we
incline to overlook this fact. There are really four dimensions,
three which we call the three planes of Space, and a fourth, Time.
There is, however, a tendency to draw an unreal distinction between
the former three dimensions and the latter, because it happens that
our consciousness moves intermittently in one direction along the
latter from the beginning to the end of our lives.'

'That,' said a very young man, making spasmodic efforts to relight
his cigar over the lamp; 'that ... very clear indeed.'

'Now, it is very remarkable that this is so extensively overlooked,'
continued the Time Traveller, with a slight accession of
cheerfulness. 'Really this is what is meant by the Fourth Dimension,
though some people who talk about the Fourth Dimension do not know
they mean it. It is only another way of looking at Time. There is
no difference between Time and any of the three dimensions of Space
except that our consciousness moves along it. But some foolish
people have got hold of the wrong side of that idea. You have all
heard what they have to say about this Fourth Dimension?'

'I have not,' said the Provincial Mayor.

'It is simply this. That Space, as our mathematicians have it, is
spoken of as having three dimensions, which one may call Length,
Breadth, and Thickness, and is always definable by reference to
three planes, each at right angles to the others. But some
philosophical people have been asking why three dimensions
particularly--why not another direction at right angles to the other
three?--and have even tried to construct a Four-Dimension geometry.
Professor Simon Newcomb was expounding this to the New York
Mathematical Society only a month or so ago. You know how on a flat
surface, which has only two dimensions, we can represent a figure of
a three-dimensional solid, and similarly they think that by models
of three dimensions they could represent one of four--if they could
master the perspective of the thing. See?'

'I think so,' murmured the Provincial Mayor; and, knitting his
brows, he lapsed into an introspective state, his lips moving as one
who repeats mystic words. 'Yes, I think I see it now,' he said after
some time, brightening in a quite transitory manner.

'Well, I do not mind telling you I have been at work upon this
geometry of Four Dimensions for some time. Some of my results
are curious. For instance, here is a portrait of a man at eight
years old, another at fifteen, another at seventeen, another at
twenty-three, and so on. All these are evidently sections, as it
were, Three-Dimensional representations of his Four-Dimensioned
being, which is a fixed and unalterable thing.

'Scientific people,' proceeded the Time Traveller, after the pause
required for the proper assimilation of this, 'know very well that
Time is only a kind of Space. Here is a popular scientific diagram,
a weather record. This line I trace with my finger shows the
movement of the barometer. Yesterday it was so high, yesterday night
it fell, then this morning it rose again, and so gently upward to
here. Surely the mercury did not trace this line in any of the
dimensions of Space generally recognized? But certainly it traced
such a line, and that line, therefore, we must conclude was along
the Time-Dimension.'

'But,' said the Medical Man, staring hard at a coal in the fire, 'if
Time is really only a fourth dimension of Space, why is it, and why
has it always been, regarded as something different? And why cannot
we move in Time as we move about in the other dimensions of Space?'

The Time Traveller smiled. 'Are you sure we can move freely in
Space? Right and left we can go, backward and forward freely enough,
and men always have done so. I admit we move freely in two
dimensions. But how about up and down? Gravitation limits us there.'

'Not exactly,' said the Medical Man. 'There are balloons.'

'But before the balloons, save for spasmodic jumping and the
inequalities of the surface, man had no freedom of vertical
movement.'

'Still they could move a little up and down,' said the Medical Man.

'Easier, far easier down than up.'

'And you cannot move at all in Time, you cannot get away from the
present moment.'

'My dear sir, that is just where you are wrong. That is just where
the whole world has gone wrong. We are always getting away from the
present moment. Our mental existences, which are immaterial and have
no dimensions, are passing along the Time-Dimension with a uniform
velocity from the cradle to the grave. Just as we should travel down
if we began our existence fifty miles above the earth's surface.'

'But the great difficulty is this,' interrupted the Psychologist.
'You can move about in all directions of Space, but you cannot
move about in Time.'

'That is the germ of my great discovery. But you are wrong to say
that we cannot move about in Time. For instance, if I am recalling
an incident very vividly I go back to the instant of its occurrence:
I become absent-minded, as you say. I jump back for a moment. Of
course we have no means of staying back for any length of Time, any
more than a savage or an animal has of staying six feet above the
ground. But a civilized man is better off than the savage in this
respect. He can go up against gravitation in a balloon, and why
should he not hope that ultimately he may be able to stop or
accelerate his drift along the Time-Dimension, or even turn about
and travel the other way?'

'Oh, this,' began Filby, 'is all--'

'Why not?' said the Time Traveller.

'It's against reason,' said Filby.

'What reason?' said the Time Traveller.

'You can show black is white by argument,' said Filby, 'but you will
never convince me.'

'Possibly not,' said the Time Traveller. 'But now you begin to see
the object of my investigations into the geometry of Four
Dimensions. Long ago I had a vague inkling of a machine--'

'To travel through Time!' exclaimed the Very Young Man.

'That shall travel indifferently in any direction of Space and Time,
as the driver determines.'

Filby contented himself with laughter.

'But I have experimental verification,' said the Time Traveller.

'It would be remarkably convenient for the historian,' the
Psychologist suggested. 'One might travel back and verify the
accepted account of the Battle of Hastings, for instance!'

'Don't you think you would attract attention?' said the Medical Man.
'Our ancestors had no great tolerance for anachronisms.'

'One might get one's Greek from the very lips of Homer and Plato,'
the Very Young Man thought.

'In which case they would certainly plough you for the Little-go.
The German scholars have improved Greek so much.'

'Then there is the future,' said the Very Young Man. 'Just think!
One might invest all one's money, leave it to accumulate at
interest, and hurry on ahead!'

'To discover a society,' said I, 'erected on a strictly communistic
basis.'

'Of all the wild extravagant theories!' began the Psychologist.

'Yes, so it seemed to me, and so I never talked of it until--'

'Experimental verification!' cried I. 'You are going to verify
that?'

'The experiment!' cried Filby, who was getting brain-weary.

'Let's see your experiment anyhow,' said the Psychologist, 'though
it's all humbug, you know.'

The Time Traveller smiled round at us. Then, still smiling faintly,
and with his hands deep in his trousers pockets, he walked slowly
out of the room, and we heard his slippers shuffling down the long
passage to his laboratory.

The Psychologist looked at us. 'I wonder what he's got?'

'Some sleight-of-hand trick or other,' said the Medical Man, and
Filby tried to tell us about a conjurer he had seen at Burslem; but
before he had finished his preface the Time Traveller came back, and
Filby's anecdote collapsed.

The thing the Time Traveller held in his hand was a glittering
metallic framework, scarcely larger than a small clock, and very
delicately made. There was ivory in it, and some transparent
crystalline substance. And now I must be explicit, for this that
follows--unless his explanation is to be accepted--is an absolutely
unaccountable thing. He took one of the small octagonal tables that
were scattered about the room, and set it in front of the fire, with
two legs on the hearthrug. On this table he placed the mechanism.
Then he drew up a chair, and sat down. The only other object on the
table was a small shaded lamp, the bright light of which fell upon
the model. There were also perhaps a dozen candles about, two in
brass candlesticks upon the mantel and several in sconces, so that
the room was brilliantly illuminated. I sat in a low arm-chair
nearest the fire, and I drew this forward so as to be almost between
the Time Traveller and the fireplace. Filby sat behind him, looking
over his shoulder. The Medical Man and the Provincial Mayor watched
him in profile from the right, the Psychologist from the left. The
Very Young Man stood behind the Psychologist. We were all on the
alert. It appears incredible to me that any kind of trick, however
subtly conceived and however adroitly done, could have been played
upon us under these conditions.

The Time Traveller looked at us, and then at the mechanism. 'Well?'
said the Psychologist.

'This little affair,' said the Time Traveller, resting his elbows
upon the table and pressing his hands together above the apparatus,
'is only a model. It is my plan for a machine to travel through
time. You will notice that it looks singularly askew, and that there
is an odd twinkling appearance about this bar, as though it was in
some way unreal.' He pointed to the part with his finger. 'Also,
here is one little white lever, and here is another.'

The Medical Man got up out of his chair and peered into the thing.
'It's beautifully made,' he said.

'It took two years to make,' retorted the Time Traveller. Then, when
we had all imitated the action of the Medical Man, he said: 'Now I
want you clearly to understand that this lever, being pressed over,
sends the machine gliding into the future, and this other reverses
the motion. This saddle represents the seat of a time traveller.
Presently I am going to press the lever, and off the machine will
go. It will vanish, pass into future Time, and disappear. Have a
good look at the thing. Look at the table too, and satisfy
yourselves there is no trickery. I don't want to waste this model,
and then be told I'm a quack.'

There was a minute's pause perhaps. The Psychologist seemed about to
speak to me, but changed his mind. Then the Time Traveller put forth
his finger towards the lever. 'No,' he said suddenly. 'Lend me your
hand.' And turning to the Psychologist, he took that individual's
hand in his own and told him to put out his forefinger. So that it
was the Psychologist himself who sent forth the model Time Machine
on its interminable voyage. We all saw the lever turn. I am
absolutely certain there was no trickery. There was a breath of
wind, and the lamp flame jumped. One of the candles on the mantel
was blown out, and the little machine suddenly swung round, became
indistinct, was seen as a ghost for a second perhaps, as an eddy of
faintly glittering brass and ivory; and it was gone--vanished! Save
for the lamp the table was bare.

Everyone was silent for a minute. Then Filby said he was damned.

The Psychologist recovered from his stupor, and suddenly looked
under the table. At that the Time Traveller laughed cheerfully.
'Well?' he said, with a reminiscence of the Psychologist. Then,
getting up, he went to the tobacco jar on the mantel, and with his
back to us began to fill his pipe.

We stared at each other. 'Look here,' said the Medical Man, 'are you
in earnest about this? Do you seriously believe that that machine
has travelled into time?'

'Certainly,' said the Time Traveller, stooping to light a spill at
the fire. Then he turned, lighting his pipe, to look at the
Psychologist's face. (The Psychologist, to show that he was not
unhinged, helped himself to a cigar and tried to light it uncut.)
'What is more, I have a big machine nearly finished in there'--he
indicated the laboratory--'and when that is put together I mean to
have a journey on my own account.'

'You mean to say that that machine has travelled into the future?'
said Filby.

'Into the future or the past--I don't, for certain, know which.'

After an interval the Psychologist had an inspiration. 'It must have
gone into the past if it has gone anywhere,' he said.

'Why?' said the Time Traveller.

'Because I presume that it has not moved in space, and if it
travelled into the future it would still be here all this time,
since it must have travelled through this time.'

'But,' I said, 'If it travelled into the past it would have been
visible when we came first into this room; and last Thursday when we
were here; and the Thursday before that; and so forth!'

'Serious objections,' remarked the Provincial Mayor, with an air of
impartiality, turning towards the Time Traveller.

'Not a bit,' said the Time Traveller, and, to the Psychologist: 'You
think. You can explain that. It's presentation below the threshold,
you know, diluted presentation.'

'Of course,' said the Psychologist, and reassured us. 'That's a
simple point of psychology. I should have thought of it. It's plain
enough, and helps the paradox delightfully. We cannot see it, nor
can we appreciate this machine, any more than we can the spoke of
a wheel spinning, or a bullet flying through the air. If it is
travelling through time fifty times or a hundred times faster than
we are, if it gets through a minute while we get through a second,
the impression it creates will of course be only one-fiftieth or
one-hundredth of what it would make if it were not travelling in
time. That's plain enough.' He passed his hand through the space in
which the machine had been. 'You see?' he said, laughing.

We sat and stared at the vacant table for a minute or so. Then the
Time Traveller asked us what we thought of it all.

'It sounds plausible enough to-night,' said the Medical Man; 'but
wait until to-morrow. Wait for the common sense of the morning.'

'Would you like to see the Time Machine itself?' asked the Time
Traveller. And therewith, taking the lamp in his hand, he led the
way down the long, draughty corridor to his laboratory. I remember
vividly the flickering light, his queer, broad head in silhouette,
the dance of the shadows, how we all followed him, puzzled but
incredulous, and how there in the laboratory we beheld a larger
edition of the little mechanism which we had seen vanish from before
our eyes. Parts were of nickel, parts of ivory, parts had certainly
been filed or sawn out of rock crystal. The thing was generally
complete, but the twisted crystalline bars lay unfinished upon the
bench beside some sheets of drawings, and I took one up for a better
look at it. Quartz it seemed to be.

'Look here,' said the Medical Man, 'are you perfectly serious?
Or is this a trick--like that ghost you showed us last Christmas?'

'Upon that machine,' said the Time Traveller, holding the lamp
aloft, 'I intend to explore time. Is that plain? I was never more
serious in my life.'

None of us quite knew how to take it.

I caught Filby's eye over the shoulder of the Medical Man, and he
winked at me solemnly.

II

I think that at that time none of us quite believed in the Time
Machine. The fact is, the Time Traveller was one of those men who
are too clever to be believed: you never felt that you saw all round
him; you always suspected some subtle reserve, some ingenuity in
ambush, behind his lucid frankness. Had Filby shown the model and
explained the matter in the Time Traveller's words, we should have
shown him far less scepticism. For we should have perceived his
motives; a pork butcher could understand Filby. But the Time
Traveller had more than a touch of whim among his elements, and we
distrusted him. Things that would have made the frame of a less
clever man seemed tricks in his hands. It is a mistake to do things
too easily. The serious people who took him seriously never felt
quite sure of his deportment; they were somehow aware that trusting
their reputations for judgment with him was like furnishing a
nursery with egg-shell china. So I don't think any of us said very
much about time travelling in the interval between that Thursday and
the next, though its odd potentialities ran, no doubt, in most of
our minds: its plausibility, that is, its practical incredibleness,
the curious possibilities of anachronism and of utter confusion it
suggested. For my own part, I was particularly preoccupied with the
trick of the model. That I remember discussing with the Medical Man,
whom I met on Friday at the Linnaean. He said he had seen a similar
thing at Tubingen, and laid considerable stress on the blowing out
of the candle. But how the trick was done he could not explain.

The next Thursday I went again to Richmond--I suppose I was one of
the Time Traveller's most constant guests--and, arriving late, found
four or five men already assembled in his drawing-room. The Medical
Man was standing before the fire with a sheet of paper in one hand
and his watch in the other. I looked round for the Time Traveller,
and--'It's half-past seven now,' said the Medical Man. 'I suppose
we'd better have dinner?'

'Where's----?' said I, naming our host.

'You've just come? It's rather odd. He's unavoidably detained. He
asks me in this note to lead off with dinner at seven if he's not
back. Says he'll explain when he comes.'

'It seems a pity to let the dinner spoil,' said the Editor of a
well-known daily paper; and thereupon the Doctor rang the bell.

The Psychologist was the only person besides the Doctor and myself
who had attended the previous dinner. The other men were Blank, the
Editor aforementioned, a certain journalist, and another--a quiet,
shy man with a beard--whom I didn't know, and who, as far as my
observation went, never opened his mouth all the evening. There was
some speculation at the dinner-table about the Time Traveller's
absence, and I suggested time travelling, in a half-jocular spirit.
The Editor wanted that explained to him, and the Psychologist
volunteered a wooden account of the 'ingenious paradox and trick' we
had witnessed that day week. He was in the midst of his exposition
when the door from the corridor opened slowly and without noise. I
was facing the door, and saw it first. 'Hallo!' I said. 'At last!'
And the door opened wider, and the Time Traveller stood before us.
I gave a cry of surprise. 'Good heavens! man, what's the matter?'
cried the Medical Man, who saw him next. And the whole tableful
turned towards the door.

He was in an amazing plight. His coat was dusty and dirty, and
smeared with green down the sleeves; his hair disordered, and as it
seemed to me greyer--either with dust and dirt or because its colour
had actually faded. His face was ghastly pale; his chin had a brown
cut on it--a cut half healed; his expression was haggard and drawn,
as by intense suffering. For a moment he hesitated in the doorway,
as if he had been dazzled by the light. Then he came into the room.
He walked with just such a limp as I have seen in footsore tramps.
We stared at him in silence, expecting him to speak.

He said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and made a
motion towards the wine. The Editor filled a glass of champagne, and
pushed it towards him. He drained it, and it seemed to do him good:
for he looked round the table, and the ghost of his old smile
flickered across his face. 'What on earth have you been up to, man?'
said the Doctor. The Time Traveller did not seem to hear. 'Don't let
me disturb you,' he said, with a certain faltering articulation.
'I'm all right.' He stopped, held out his glass for more, and took
it off at a draught. 'That's good,' he said. His eyes grew brighter,
and a faint colour came into his cheeks. His glance flickered over
our faces with a certain dull approval, and then went round the warm
and comfortable room. Then he spoke again, still as it were feeling
his way among his words. 'I'm going to wash and dress, and then I'll
come down and explain things ... Save me some of that mutton. I'm
starving for a bit of meat.'

He looked across at the Editor, who was a rare visitor, and hoped he
was all right. The Editor began a question. 'Tell you presently,'
said the Time Traveller. 'I'm--funny! Be all right in a minute.'

He put down his glass, and walked towards the staircase door. Again
I remarked his lameness and the soft padding sound of his footfall,
and standing up in my place, I saw his feet as he went out. He had
nothing on them but a pair of tattered, blood-stained socks. Then the
door closed upon him. I had half a mind to follow, till I remembered
how he detested any fuss about himself. For a minute, perhaps, my
mind was wool-gathering. Then, 'Remarkable Behaviour of an Eminent
Scientist,' I heard the Editor say, thinking (after his wont) in
headlines. And this brought my attention back to the bright
dinner-table.

'What's the game?' said the Journalist. 'Has he been doing the
Amateur Cadger? I don't follow.' I met the eye of the Psychologist,
and read my own interpretation in his face. I thought of the Time
Traveller limping painfully upstairs. I don't think any one else had
noticed his lameness.

The first to recover completely from this surprise was the Medical
Man, who rang the bell--the Time Traveller hated to have servants
waiting at dinner--for a hot plate. At that the Editor turned to his
knife and fork with a grunt, and the Silent Man followed suit. The
dinner was resumed. Conversation was exclamatory for a little while,
with gaps of wonderment; and then the Editor got fervent in his
curiosity. 'Does our friend eke out his modest income with a
crossing? or has he his Nebuchadnezzar phases?' he inquired. 'I feel
assured it's this business of the Time Machine,' I said, and took up
the Psychologist's account of our previous meeting. The new guests
were frankly incredulous. The Editor raised objections. 'What was
this time travelling? A man couldn't cover himself with dust by
rolling in a paradox, could he?' And then, as the idea came home to
him, he resorted to caricature. Hadn't they any clothes-brushes in
the Future? The Journalist too, would not believe at any price, and
joined the Editor in the easy work of heaping ridicule on the whole
thing. They were both the new kind of journalist--very joyous,
irreverent young men. 'Our Special Correspondent in the Day
after To-morrow reports,' the Journalist was saying--or rather
shouting--when the Time Traveller came back. He was dressed in
ordinary evening clothes, and nothing save his haggard look remained
of the change that had startled me.

'I say,' said the Editor hilariously, 'these chaps here say you have
been travelling into the middle of next week! Tell us all about
little Rosebery, will you? What will you take for the lot?'

The Time Traveller came to the place reserved for him without a
word. He smiled quietly, in his old way. 'Where's my mutton?' he
said. 'What a treat it is to stick a fork into meat again!'

'Story!' cried the Editor.

'Story be damned!' said the Time Traveller. 'I want something to
eat. I won't say a word until I get some peptone into my arteries.
Thanks. And the salt.'

'One word,' said I. 'Have you been time travelling?'

'Yes,' said the Time Traveller, with his mouth full, nodding his
head.

'I'd give a shilling a line for a verbatim note,' said the Editor.
The Time Traveller pushed his glass towards the Silent Man and rang
it with his fingernail; at which the Silent Man, who had been
staring at his face, started convulsively, and poured him wine.
The rest of the dinner was uncomfortable. For my own part, sudden
questions kept on rising to my lips, and I dare say it was the same
with the others. The Journalist tried to relieve the tension by
telling anecdotes of Hettie Potter. The Time Traveller devoted his
attention to his dinner, and displayed the appetite of a tramp.
The Medical Man smoked a cigarette, and watched the Time Traveller
through his eyelashes. The Silent Man seemed even more clumsy than
usual, and drank champagne with regularity and determination out of
sheer nervousness. At last the Time Traveller pushed his plate away,
and looked round us. 'I suppose I must apologize,' he said. 'I was
simply starving. I've had a most amazing time.' He reached out his
hand for a cigar, and cut the end. 'But come into the smoking-room.
It's too long a story to tell over greasy plates.' And ringing the
bell in passing, he led the way into the adjoining room.

'You have told Blank, and Dash, and Chose about the machine?' he
said to me, leaning back in his easy-chair and naming the three new
guests.

'But the thing's a mere paradox,' said the Editor.

'I can't argue to-night. I don't mind telling you the story, but
I can't argue. I will,' he went on, 'tell you the story of what
has happened to me, if you like, but you must refrain from
interruptions. I want to tell it. Badly. Most of it will sound like
lying. So be it! It's true--every word of it, all the same. I was in
my laboratory at four o'clock, and since then ... I've lived eight
days ... such days as no human being ever lived before! I'm nearly
worn out, but I shan't sleep till I've told this thing over to you.
Then I shall go to bed. But no interruptions! Is it agreed?'

'Agreed,' said the Editor, and the rest of us echoed 'Agreed.' And
with that the Time Traveller began his story as I have set it forth.
He sat back in his chair at first, and spoke like a weary man.
Afterwards he got more animated. In writing it down I feel with only
too much keenness the inadequacy of pen and ink--and, above all, my
own inadequacy--to express its quality. You read, I will suppose,
attentively enough; but you cannot see the speaker's white,
sincere face in the bright circle of the little lamp, nor hear the
intonation of his voice. You cannot know how his expression followed
the turns of his story! Most of us hearers were in shadow, for the
candles in the smoking-room had not been lighted, and only the face
of the Journalist and the legs of the Silent Man from the knees
downward were illuminated. At first we glanced now and again at each
other. After a time we ceased to do that, and looked only at the
Time Traveller's face.

III

'I told some of you last Thursday of the principles of the Time
Machine, and showed you the actual thing itself, incomplete in the
workshop. There it is now, a little travel-worn, truly; and one of
the ivory bars is cracked, and a brass rail bent; but the rest of
it's sound enough. I expected to finish it on Friday, but on Friday,
when the putting together was nearly done, I found that one of the
nickel bars was exactly one inch too short, and this I had to get
remade; so that the thing was not complete until this morning. It
was at ten o'clock to-day that the first of all Time Machines began
its career. I gave it a last tap, tried all the screws again, put
one more drop of oil on the quartz rod, and sat myself in the
saddle. I suppose a suicide who holds a pistol to his skull feels
much the same wonder at what will come next as I felt then. I took
the starting lever in one hand and the stopping one in the other,
pressed the first, and almost immediately the second. I seemed to
reel; I felt a nightmare sensation of falling; and, looking round,
I saw the laboratory exactly as before. Had anything happened? For
a moment I suspected that my intellect had tricked me. Then I noted
the clock. A moment before, as it seemed, it had stood at a minute
or so past ten; now it was nearly half-past three!

'I drew a breath, set my teeth, gripped the starting lever with both
hands, and went off with a thud. The laboratory got hazy and went
dark. Mrs. Watchett came in and walked, apparently without seeing
me, towards the garden door. I suppose it took her a minute or so to
traverse the place, but to me she seemed to shoot across the room
like a rocket. I pressed the lever over to its extreme position. The
night came like the turning out of a lamp, and in another moment
came to-morrow. The laboratory grew faint and hazy, then fainter
and ever fainter. To-morrow night came black, then day again, night
again, day again, faster and faster still. An eddying murmur filled
my ears, and a strange, dumb confusedness descended on my mind.

'I am afraid I cannot convey the peculiar sensations of time
travelling. They are excessively unpleasant. There is a feeling
exactly like that one has upon a switchback--of a helpless headlong
motion! I felt the same horrible anticipation, too, of an imminent
smash. As I put on pace, night followed day like the flapping of a
black wing. The dim suggestion of the laboratory seemed presently to
fall away from me, and I saw the sun hopping swiftly across the sky,
leaping it every minute, and every minute marking a day. I supposed
the laboratory had been destroyed and I had come into the open air.
I had a dim impression of scaffolding, but I was already going too
fast to be conscious of any moving things. The slowest snail that
ever crawled dashed by too fast for me. The twinkling succession of
darkness and light was excessively painful to the eye. Then, in the
intermittent darknesses, I saw the moon spinning swiftly through her
quarters from new to full, and had a faint glimpse of the circling
stars. Presently, as I went on, still gaining velocity, the
palpitation of night and day merged into one continuous greyness;
the sky took on a wonderful deepness of blue, a splendid luminous
color like that of early twilight; the jerking sun became a streak
of fire, a brilliant arch, in space; the moon a fainter fluctuating
band; and I could see nothing of the stars, save now and then a
brighter circle flickering in the blue.

'The landscape was misty and vague. I was still on the hill-side
upon which this house now stands, and the shoulder rose above me
grey and dim. I saw trees growing and changing like puffs of vapour,
now brown, now green; they grew, spread, shivered, and passed away.
I saw huge buildings rise up faint and fair, and pass like dreams.
The whole surface of the earth seemed changed--melting and flowing
under my eyes. The little hands upon the dials that registered my
speed raced round faster and faster. Presently I noted that the sun
belt swayed up and down, from solstice to solstice, in a minute or
less, and that consequently my pace was over a year a minute; and
minute by minute the white snow flashed across the world, and
vanished, and was followed by the bright, brief green of spring.

'The unpleasant sensations of the start were less poignant now. They
merged at last into a kind of hysterical exhilaration. I remarked
indeed a clumsy swaying of the machine, for which I was unable to
account. But my mind was too confused to attend to it, so with a
kind of madness growing upon me, I flung myself into futurity. At
first I scarce thought of stopping, scarce thought of anything but
these new sensations. But presently a fresh series of impressions
grew up in my mind--a certain curiosity and therewith a certain
dread--until at last they took complete possession of me. What
strange developments of humanity, what wonderful advances upon our
rudimentary civilization, I thought, might not appear when I came to
look nearly into the dim elusive world that raced and fluctuated
before my eyes! I saw great and splendid architecture rising about
me, more massive than any buildings of our own time, and yet, as it
seemed, built of glimmer and mist. I saw a richer green flow up the
hill-side, and remain there, without any wintry intermission. Even
through the veil of my confusion the earth seemed very fair. And so
my mind came round to the business of stopping.

'The peculiar risk lay in the possibility of my finding some
substance in the space which I, or the machine, occupied. So long
as I travelled at a high velocity through time, this scarcely
mattered; I was, so to speak, attenuated--was slipping like a vapour
through the interstices of intervening substances! But to come to
a stop involved the jamming of myself, molecule by molecule, into
whatever lay in my way; meant bringing my atoms into such intimate
contact with those of the obstacle that a profound chemical
reaction--possibly a far-reaching explosion--would result, and blow
myself and my apparatus out of all possible dimensions--into the
Unknown. This possibility had occurred to me again and again while I
was making the machine; but then I had cheerfully accepted it as an
unavoidable risk--one of the risks a man has got to take! Now the
risk was inevitable, I no longer saw it in the same cheerful light.
The fact is that, insensibly, the absolute strangeness of everything,
the sickly jarring and swaying of the machine, above all, the
feeling of prolonged falling, had absolutely upset my nerve. I told
myself that I could never stop, and with a gust of petulance I
resolved to stop forthwith. Like an impatient fool, I lugged over
the lever, and incontinently the thing went reeling over, and I was
flung headlong through the air.

'There was the sound of a clap of thunder in my ears. I may have
been stunned for a moment. A pitiless hail was hissing round me,
and I was sitting on soft turf in front of the overset machine.
Everything still seemed grey, but presently I remarked that the
confusion in my ears was gone. I looked round me. I was on what
seemed to be a little lawn in a garden, surrounded by rhododendron
bushes, and I noticed that their mauve and purple blossoms were
dropping in a shower under the beating of the hail-stones. The
rebounding, dancing hail hung in a cloud over the machine, and drove
along the ground like smoke. In a moment I was wet to the skin.
"Fine hospitality," said I, "to a man who has travelled innumerable
years to see you."

'Presently I thought what a fool I was to get wet. I stood up and
looked round me. A colossal figure, carved apparently in some white
stone, loomed indistinctly beyond the rhododendrons through the hazy
downpour. But all else of the world was invisible.

'My sensations would be hard to describe. As the columns of hail
grew thinner, I saw the white figure more distinctly. It was very
large, for a silver birch-tree touched its shoulder. It was of white
marble, in shape something like a winged sphinx, but the wings,
instead of being carried vertically at the sides, were spread so
that it seemed to hover. The pedestal, it appeared to me, was of
bronze, and was thick with verdigris. It chanced that the face was
towards me; the sightless eyes seemed to watch me; there was the
faint shadow of a smile on the lips. It was greatly weather-worn,
and that imparted an unpleasant suggestion of disease. I stood
looking at it for a little space--half a minute, perhaps, or half an
hour. It seemed to advance and to recede as the hail drove before it
denser or thinner. At last I tore my eyes from it for a moment and
saw that the hail curtain had worn threadbare, and that the sky was
lightening with the promise of the sun.

'I looked up again at the crouching white shape, and the full
temerity of my voyage came suddenly upon me. What might appear when
that hazy curtain was altogether withdrawn? What might not have
happened to men? What if cruelty had grown into a common passion?
What if in this interval the race had lost its manliness and had
developed into something inhuman, unsympathetic, and overwhelmingly
powerful? I might seem some old-world savage animal, only the more
dreadful and disgusting for our common likeness--a foul creature to
be incontinently slain.

'Already I saw other vast shapes--huge buildings with intricate
parapets and tall columns, with a wooded hill-side dimly creeping
in upon me through the lessening storm. I was seized with a panic
fear. I turned frantically to the Time Machine, and strove hard to
readjust it. As I did so the shafts of the sun smote through the
thunderstorm. The grey downpour was swept aside and vanished like
the trailing garments of a ghost. Above me, in the intense blue
of the summer sky, some faint brown shreds of cloud whirled into
nothingness. The great buildings about me stood out clear and
distinct, shining with the wet of the thunderstorm, and picked out
in white by the unmelted hailstones piled along their courses. I
felt naked in a strange world. I felt as perhaps a bird may feel in
the clear air, knowing the hawk wings above and will swoop. My fear
grew to frenzy. I took a breathing space, set my teeth, and again
grappled fiercely, wrist and knee, with the machine. It gave under
my desperate onset and turned over. It struck my chin violently. One
hand on the saddle, the other on the lever, I stood panting heavily
in attitude to mount again.

'But with this recovery of a prompt retreat my courage recovered. I
looked more curiously and less fearfully at this world of the remote
future. In a circular opening, high up in the wall of the nearer
house, I saw a group of figures clad in rich soft robes. They had
seen me, and their faces were directed towards me.

'Then I heard voices approaching me. Coming through the bushes by
the White Sphinx were the heads and shoulders of men running. One of
these emerged in a pathway leading straight to the little lawn upon
which I stood with my machine. He was a slight creature--perhaps
four feet high--clad in a purple tunic, girdled at the waist with a
leather belt. Sandals or buskins--I could not clearly distinguish
which--were on his feet; his legs were bare to the knees, and his
head was bare. Noticing that, I noticed for the first time how warm
the air was.

'He struck me as being a very beautiful and graceful creature, but
indescribably frail. His flushed face reminded me of the more
beautiful kind of consumptive--that hectic beauty of which we used
to hear so much. At the sight of him I suddenly regained confidence.
I took my hands from the machine.

IV

'In another moment we were standing face to face, I and this fragile
thing out of futurity. He came straight up to me and laughed into my
eyes. The absence from his bearing of any sign of fear struck me at
once. Then he turned to the two others who were following him and
spoke to them in a strange and very sweet and liquid tongue.

'There were others coming, and presently a little group of perhaps
eight or ten of these exquisite creatures were about me. One of them
addressed me. It came into my head, oddly enough, that my voice was
too harsh and deep for them. So I shook my head, and, pointing to my
ears, shook it again. He came a step forward, hesitated, and then
touched my hand. Then I felt other soft little tentacles upon my
back and shoulders. They wanted to make sure I was real. There was
nothing in this at all alarming. Indeed, there was something in
these pretty little people that inspired confidence--a graceful
gentleness, a certain childlike ease. And besides, they looked so
frail that I could fancy myself flinging the whole dozen of them
about like nine-pins. But I made a sudden motion to warn them when I
saw their little pink hands feeling at the Time Machine. Happily
then, when it was not too late, I thought of a danger I had hitherto
forgotten, and reaching over the bars of the machine I unscrewed the
little levers that would set it in motion, and put these in my
pocket. Then I turned again to see what I could do in the way of
communication.

'And then, looking more nearly into their features, I saw some
further peculiarities in their Dresden-china type of prettiness.
Their hair, which was uniformly curly, came to a sharp end at the
neck and cheek; there was not the faintest suggestion of it on the
face, and their ears were singularly minute. The mouths were small,
with bright red, rather thin lips, and the little chins ran to a
point. The eyes were large and mild; and--this may seem egotism on
my part--I fancied even that there was a certain lack of the
interest I might have expected in them.

'As they made no effort to communicate with me, but simply stood
round me smiling and speaking in soft cooing notes to each other, I
began the conversation. I pointed to the Time Machine and to myself.
Then hesitating for a moment how to express time, I pointed to the
sun. At once a quaintly pretty little figure in chequered purple and
white followed my gesture, and then astonished me by imitating the
sound of thunder.

'For a moment I was staggered, though the import of his gesture was
plain enough. The question had come into my mind abruptly: were
these creatures fools? You may hardly understand how it took me.
You see I had always anticipated that the people of the year Eight
Hundred and Two Thousand odd would be incredibly in front of us in
knowledge, art, everything. Then one of them suddenly asked me a
question that showed him to be on the intellectual level of one of
our five-year-old children--asked me, in fact, if I had come from
the sun in a thunderstorm! It let loose the judgment I had suspended
upon their clothes, their frail light limbs, and fragile features.
A flow of disappointment rushed across my mind. For a moment I felt
that I had built the Time Machine in vain.

'I nodded, pointed to the sun, and gave them such a vivid rendering
of a thunderclap as startled them. They all withdrew a pace or so
and bowed. Then came one laughing towards me, carrying a chain of
beautiful flowers altogether new to me, and put it about my neck.
The idea was received with melodious applause; and presently they
were all running to and fro for flowers, and laughingly flinging
them upon me until I was almost smothered with blossom. You who
have never seen the like can scarcely imagine what delicate and
wonderful flowers countless years of culture had created. Then
someone suggested that their plaything should be exhibited in the
nearest building, and so I was led past the sphinx of white marble,
which had seemed to watch me all the while with a smile at my
astonishment, towards a vast grey edifice of fretted stone. As I
went with them the memory of my confident anticipations of a
profoundly grave and intellectual posterity came, with irresistible
merriment, to my mind.

'The building had a huge entry, and was altogether of colossal
dimensions. I was naturally most occupied with the growing crowd of
little people, and with the big open portals that yawned before me
shadowy and mysterious. My general impression of the world I saw
over their heads was a tangled waste of beautiful bushes and
flowers, a long neglected and yet weedless garden. I saw a number
of tall spikes of strange white flowers, measuring a foot perhaps
across the spread of the waxen petals. They grew scattered, as if
wild, among the variegated shrubs, but, as I say, I did not examine
them closely at this time. The Time Machine was left deserted on the
turf among the rhododendrons.

'The arch of the doorway was richly carved, but naturally I did
not observe the carving very narrowly, though I fancied I saw
suggestions of old Phoenician decorations as I passed through, and
it struck me that they were very badly broken and weather-worn.
Several more brightly clad people met me in the doorway, and so we
entered, I, dressed in dingy nineteenth-century garments, looking
grotesque enough, garlanded with flowers, and surrounded by an
eddying mass of bright, soft-colored robes and shining white limbs,
in a melodious whirl of laughter and laughing speech.

'The big doorway opened into a proportionately great hall hung with
brown. The roof was in shadow, and the windows, partially glazed
with coloured glass and partially unglazed, admitted a tempered
light. The floor was made up of huge blocks of some very hard white
metal, not plates nor slabs--blocks, and it was so much worn, as I
judged by the going to and fro of past generations, as to be deeply
channelled along the more frequented ways. Transverse to the length
were innumerable tables made of slabs of polished stone, raised
perhaps a foot from the floor, and upon these were heaps of fruits.
Some I recognized as a kind of hypertrophied raspberry and orange,
but for the most part they were strange.

'Between the tables was scattered a great number of cushions.
Upon these my conductors seated themselves, signing for me to do
likewise. With a pretty absence of ceremony they began to eat the
fruit with their hands, flinging peel and stalks, and so forth, into
the round openings in the sides of the tables. I was not loath to
follow their example, for I felt thirsty and hungry. As I did so I
surveyed the hall at my leisure.

'And perhaps the thing that struck me most was its dilapidated look.
The stained-glass windows, which displayed only a geometrical
pattern, were broken in many places, and the curtains that hung
across the lower end were thick with dust. And it caught my eye that
the corner of the marble table near me was fractured. Nevertheless,
the general effect was extremely rich and picturesque. There were,
perhaps, a couple of hundred people dining in the hall, and most of
them, seated as near to me as they could come, were watching me with
interest, their little eyes shining over the fruit they were eating.
All were clad in the same soft and yet strong, silky material.

'Fruit, by the by, was all their diet. These people of the remote
future were strict vegetarians, and while I was with them, in spite
of some carnal cravings, I had to be frugivorous also. Indeed, I
found afterwards that horses, cattle, sheep, dogs, had followed the
Ichthyosaurus into extinction. But the fruits were very delightful;
one, in particular, that seemed to be in season all the time I was
there--a floury thing in a three-sided husk--was especially good,
and I made it my staple. At first I was puzzled by all these strange
fruits, and by the strange flowers I saw, but later I began to
perceive their import.

'However, I am telling you of my fruit dinner in the distant future
now. So soon as my appetite was a little checked, I determined to
make a resolute attempt to learn the speech of these new men of
mine. Clearly that was the next thing to do. The fruits seemed a
convenient thing to begin upon, and holding one of these up I began
a series of interrogative sounds and gestures. I had some
considerable difficulty in conveying my meaning. At first my efforts
met with a stare of surprise or inextinguishable laughter, but
presently a fair-haired little creature seemed to grasp my intention
and repeated a name. They had to chatter and explain the business
at great length to each other, and my first attempts to make the
exquisite little sounds of their language caused an immense amount
of amusement. However, I felt like a schoolmaster amidst children,
and persisted, and presently I had a score of noun substantives at
least at my command; and then I got to demonstrative pronouns, and
even the verb "to eat." But it was slow work, and the little people
soon tired and wanted to get away from my interrogations, so I
determined, rather of necessity, to let them give their lessons in
little doses when they felt inclined. And very little doses I found
they were before long, for I never met people more indolent or more
easily fatigued.

'A queer thing I soon discovered about my little hosts, and that was
their lack of interest. They would come to me with eager cries of
astonishment, like children, but like children they would soon stop
examining me and wander away after some other toy. The dinner and my
conversational beginnings ended, I noted for the first time that
almost all those who had surrounded me at first were gone. It is
odd, too, how speedily I came to disregard these little people. I
went out through the portal into the sunlit world again as soon as
my hunger was satisfied. I was continually meeting more of these men
of the future, who would follow me a little distance, chatter and
laugh about me, and, having smiled and gesticulated in a friendly
way, leave me again to my own devices.

'The calm of evening was upon the world as I emerged from the great
hall, and the scene was lit by the warm glow of the setting sun.
At first things were very confusing. Everything was so entirely
different from the world I had known--even the flowers. The big
building I had left was situated on the slope of a broad river
valley, but the Thames had shifted perhaps a mile from its present
position. I resolved to mount to the summit of a crest, perhaps a
mile and a half away, from which I could get a wider view of this
our planet in the year Eight Hundred and Two Thousand Seven Hundred
and One A.D. For that, I should explain, was the date the little
dials of my machine recorded.

'As I walked I was watching for every impression that could possibly
help to explain the condition of ruinous splendour in which I
found the world--for ruinous it was. A little way up the hill, for
instance, was a great heap of granite, bound together by masses of
aluminium, a vast labyrinth of precipitous walls and crumpled
heaps, amidst which were thick heaps of very beautiful pagoda-like
plants--nettles possibly--but wonderfully tinted with brown about
the leaves, and incapable of stinging. It was evidently the derelict
remains of some vast structure, to what end built I could not
determine. It was here that I was destined, at a later date, to have
a very strange experience--the first intimation of a still stranger
discovery--but of that I will speak in its proper place.

'Looking round with a sudden thought, from a terrace on which I
rested for a while, I realized that there were no small houses to be
seen. Apparently the single house, and possibly even the household,
had vanished. Here and there among the greenery were palace-like
buildings, but the house and the cottage, which form such
characteristic features of our own English landscape, had
disappeared.

'"Communism," said I to myself.

'And on the heels of that came another thought. I looked at the
half-dozen little figures that were following me. Then, in a flash,
I perceived that all had the same form of costume, the same soft
hairless visage, and the same girlish rotundity of limb. It may seem
strange, perhaps, that I had not noticed this before. But everything
was so strange. Now, I saw the fact plainly enough. In costume, and
in all the differences of texture and bearing that now mark off the
sexes from each other, these people of the future were alike. And
the children seemed to my eyes to be but the miniatures of their
parents. I judged, then, that the children of that time were
extremely precocious, physically at least, and I found afterwards
abundant verification of my opinion.

'Seeing the ease and security in which these people were living, I
felt that this close resemblance of the sexes was after all what
one would expect; for the strength of a man and the softness of a
woman, the institution of the family, and the differentiation of
occupations are mere militant necessities of an age of physical
force; where population is balanced and abundant, much childbearing
becomes an evil rather than a blessing to the State; where
violence comes but rarely and off-spring are secure, there is less
necessity--indeed there is no necessity--for an efficient family,
and the specialization of the sexes with reference to their
children's needs disappears. We see some beginnings of this even
in our own time, and in this future age it was complete. This, I
must remind you, was my speculation at the time. Later, I was to
appreciate how far it fell short of the reality.

'While I was musing upon these things, my attention was attracted by
a pretty little structure, like a well under a cupola. I thought in
a transitory way of the oddness of wells still existing, and then
resumed the thread of my speculations. There were no large buildings
towards the top of the hill, and as my walking powers were evidently
miraculous, I was presently left alone for the first time. With a
strange sense of freedom and adventure I pushed on up to the crest.

'There I found a seat of some yellow metal that I did not recognize,
corroded in places with a kind of pinkish rust and half smothered
in soft moss, the arm-rests cast and filed into the resemblance of
griffins' heads. I sat down on it, and I surveyed the broad view of
our old world under the sunset of that long day. It was as sweet and
fair a view as I have ever seen. The sun had already gone below the
horizon and the west was flaming gold, touched with some horizontal
bars of purple and crimson. Below was the valley of the Thames, in
which the river lay like a band of burnished steel. I have already
spoken of the great palaces dotted about among the variegated
greenery, some in ruins and some still occupied. Here and there rose
a white or silvery figure in the waste garden of the earth, here and
there came the sharp vertical line of some cupola or obelisk. There
were no hedges, no signs of proprietary rights, no evidences of
agriculture; the whole earth had become a garden.

'So watching, I began to put my interpretation upon the things I had
seen, and as it shaped itself to me that evening, my interpretation
was something in this way. (Afterwards I found I had got only a
half-truth--or only a glimpse of one facet of the truth.)

'It seemed to me that I had happened upon humanity upon the wane.
The ruddy sunset set me thinking of the sunset of mankind. For the
first time I began to realize an odd consequence of the social
effort in which we are at present engaged. And yet, come to think,
it is a logical consequence enough. Strength is the outcome of need;
security sets a premium on feebleness. The work of ameliorating the
conditions of life--the true civilizing process that makes life more
and more secure--had gone steadily on to a climax. One triumph of a
united humanity over Nature had followed another. Things that are
now mere dreams had become projects deliberately put in hand and
carried forward. And the harvest was what I saw!

'After all, the sanitation and the agriculture of to-day are still
in the rudimentary stage. The science of our time has attacked but
a little department of the field of human disease, but even so,
it spreads its operations very steadily and persistently. Our
agriculture and horticulture destroy a weed just here and there and
cultivate perhaps a score or so of wholesome plants, leaving the
greater number to fight out a balance as they can. We improve our
favourite plants and animals--and how few they are--gradually by
selective breeding; now a new and better peach, now a seedless
grape, now a sweeter and larger flower, now a more convenient breed
of cattle. We improve them gradually, because our ideals are vague
and tentative, and our knowledge is very limited; because Nature,
too, is shy and slow in our clumsy hands. Some day all this will
be better organized, and still better. That is the drift of the
current in spite of the eddies. The whole world will be intelligent,
educated, and co-operating; things will move faster and faster
towards the subjugation of Nature. In the end, wisely and carefully
we shall readjust the balance of animal and vegetable life to suit
our human needs.

'This adjustment, I say, must have been done, and done well; done
indeed for all Time, in the space of Time across which my machine
had leaped. The air was free from gnats, the earth from weeds or
fungi; everywhere were fruits and sweet and delightful flowers;
brilliant butterflies flew hither and thither. The ideal of
preventive medicine was attained. Diseases had been stamped out. I
saw no evidence of any contagious diseases during all my stay. And I
shall have to tell you later that even the processes of putrefaction
and decay had been profoundly affected by these changes.

'Social triumphs, too, had been effected. I saw mankind housed in
splendid shelters, gloriously clothed, and as yet I had found them
engaged in no toil. There were no signs of struggle, neither social
nor economical struggle. The shop, the advertisement, traffic, all
that commerce which constitutes the body of our world, was gone. It
was natural on that golden evening that I should jump at the idea of
a social paradise. The difficulty of increasing population had been
met, I guessed, and population had ceased to increase.

'But with this change in condition comes inevitably adaptations to
the change. What, unless biological science is a mass of errors, is
the cause of human intelligence and vigour? Hardship and freedom:
conditions under which the active, strong, and subtle survive and
the weaker go to the wall; conditions that put a premium upon the
loyal alliance of capable men, upon self-restraint, patience, and
decision. And the institution of the family, and the emotions that
arise therein, the fierce jealousy, the tenderness for offspring,
parental self-devotion, all found their justification and support in
the imminent dangers of the young. Now, where are these imminent
dangers? There is a sentiment arising, and it will grow, against
connubial jealousy, against fierce maternity, against passion
of all sorts; unnecessary things now, and things that make us
uncomfortable, savage survivals, discords in a refined and pleasant
life.

'I thought of the physical slightness of the people, their lack of
intelligence, and those big abundant ruins, and it strengthened my
belief in a perfect conquest of Nature. For after the battle comes
Quiet. Humanity had been strong, energetic, and intelligent, and had
used all its abundant vitality to alter the conditions under which
it lived. And now came the reaction of the altered conditions.

'Under the new conditions of perfect comfort and security, that
restless energy, that with us is strength, would become weakness.
Even in our own time certain tendencies and desires, once necessary
to survival, are a constant source of failure. Physical courage and
the love of battle, for instance, are no great help--may even be
hindrances--to a civilized man. And in a state of physical balance
and security, power, intellectual as well as physical, would be out
of place. For countless years I judged there had been no danger of
war or solitary violence, no danger from wild beasts, no wasting
disease to require strength of constitution, no need of toil. For
such a life, what we should call the weak are as well equipped as
the strong, are indeed no longer weak. Better equipped indeed they
are, for the strong would be fretted by an energy for which there
was no outlet. No doubt the exquisite beauty of the buildings I saw
was the outcome of the last surgings of the now purposeless energy
of mankind before it settled down into perfect harmony with the
conditions under which it lived--the flourish of that triumph which
began the last great peace. This has ever been the fate of energy in
security; it takes to art and to eroticism, and then come languor
and decay.

'Even this artistic impetus would at last die away--had almost died
in the Time I saw. To adorn themselves with flowers, to dance, to
sing in the sunlight: so much was left of the artistic spirit, and
no more. Even that would fade in the end into a contented
inactivity. We are kept keen on the grindstone of pain and
necessity, and, it seemed to me, that here was that hateful
grindstone broken at last!

'As I stood there in the gathering dark I thought that in this
simple explanation I had mastered the problem of the world--mastered
the whole secret of these delicious people. Possibly the checks they
had devised for the increase of population had succeeded too well,
and their numbers had rather diminished than kept stationary.
That would account for the abandoned ruins. Very simple was my
explanation, and plausible enough--as most wrong theories are!

V

'As I stood there musing over this too perfect triumph of man, the
full moon, yellow and gibbous, came up out of an overflow of silver
light in the north-east. The bright little figures ceased to move
about below, a noiseless owl flitted by, and I shivered with the
chill of the night. I determined to descend and find where I could
sleep.

'I looked for the building I knew. Then my eye travelled along to
the figure of the White Sphinx upon the pedestal of bronze, growing
distinct as the light of the rising moon grew brighter. I could see
the silver birch against it. There was the tangle of rhododendron
bushes, black in the pale light, and there was the little lawn.
I looked at the lawn again. A queer doubt chilled my complacency.
"No," said I stoutly to myself, "that was not the lawn."

'But it was the lawn. For the white leprous face of the sphinx was
towards it. Can you imagine what I felt as this conviction came
home to me? But you cannot. The Time Machine was gone!

'At once, like a lash across the face, came the possibility of
losing my own age, of being left helpless in this strange new world.
The bare thought of it was an actual physical sensation. I could
feel it grip me at the throat and stop my breathing. In another
moment I was in a passion of fear and running with great leaping
strides down the slope. Once I fell headlong and cut my face; I lost
no time in stanching the blood, but jumped up and ran on, with a
warm trickle down my cheek and chin. All the time I ran I was saying
to myself: "They have moved it a little, pushed it under the bushes
out of the way." Nevertheless, I ran with all my might. All the
time, with the certainty that sometimes comes with excessive dread,
I knew that such assurance was folly, knew instinctively that the
machine was removed out of my reach. My breath came with pain. I
suppose I covered the whole distance from the hill crest to the
little lawn, two miles perhaps, in ten minutes. And I am not a young
man. I cursed aloud, as I ran, at my confident folly in leaving the
machine, wasting good breath thereby. I cried aloud, and none
answered. Not a creature seemed to be stirring in that moonlit
world.

'When I reached the lawn my worst fears were realized. Not a trace
of the thing was to be seen. I felt faint and cold when I faced the
empty space among the black tangle of bushes. I ran round it
furiously, as if the thing might be hidden in a corner, and then
stopped abruptly, with my hands clutching my hair. Above me towered
the sphinx, upon the bronze pedestal, white, shining, leprous, in
the light of the rising moon. It seemed to smile in mockery of my
dismay.

'I might have consoled myself by imagining the little people had put
the mechanism in some shelter for me, had I not felt assured of
their physical and intellectual inadequacy. That is what dismayed
me: the sense of some hitherto unsuspected power, through whose
intervention my invention had vanished. Yet, for one thing I felt
assured: unless some other age had produced its exact duplicate,
the machine could not have moved in time. The attachment of the
levers--I will show you the method later--prevented any one from
tampering with it in that way when they were removed. It had moved,
and was hid, only in space. But then, where could it be?

'I think I must have had a kind of frenzy. I remember running
violently in and out among the moonlit bushes all round the sphinx,
and startling some white animal that, in the dim light, I took for a
small deer. I remember, too, late that night, beating the bushes
with my clenched fist until my knuckles were gashed and bleeding
from the broken twigs. Then, sobbing and raving in my anguish of
mind, I went down to the great building of stone. The big hall was
dark, silent, and deserted. I slipped on the uneven floor, and fell
over one of the malachite tables, almost breaking my shin. I lit a
match and went on past the dusty curtains, of which I have told you.

'There I found a second great hall covered with cushions, upon
which, perhaps, a score or so of the little people were sleeping. I
have no doubt they found my second appearance strange enough, coming
suddenly out of the quiet darkness with inarticulate noises and the
splutter and flare of a match. For they had forgotten about matches.
"Where is my Time Machine?" I began, bawling like an angry child,
laying hands upon them and shaking them up together. It must have
been very queer to them. Some laughed, most of them looked sorely
frightened. When I saw them standing round me, it came into my head
that I was doing as foolish a thing as it was possible for me to do
under the circumstances, in trying to revive the sensation of fear.
For, reasoning from their daylight behaviour, I thought that fear
must be forgotten.

'Abruptly, I dashed down the match, and, knocking one of the people
over in my course, went blundering across the big dining-hall again,
out under the moonlight. I heard cries of terror and their little
feet running and stumbling this way and that. I do not remember all
I did as the moon crept up the sky. I suppose it was the unexpected
nature of my loss that maddened me. I felt hopelessly cut off from
my own kind--a strange animal in an unknown world. I must have raved
to and fro, screaming and crying upon God and Fate. I have a memory
of horrible fatigue, as the long night of despair wore away; of
looking in this impossible place and that; of groping among moon-lit
ruins and touching strange creatures in the black shadows; at last,
of lying on the ground near the sphinx and weeping with absolute
wretchedness. I had nothing left but misery. Then I slept, and when
I woke again it was full day, and a couple of sparrows were hopping
round me on the turf within reach of my arm.

'I sat up in the freshness of the morning, trying to remember how
I had got there, and why I had such a profound sense of desertion
and despair. Then things came clear in my mind. With the plain,
reasonable daylight, I could look my circumstances fairly in the
face. I saw the wild folly of my frenzy overnight, and I could
reason with myself. "Suppose the worst?" I said. "Suppose the
machine altogether lost--perhaps destroyed? It behoves me to be
calm and patient, to learn the way of the people, to get a clear
idea of the method of my loss, and the means of getting materials
and tools; so that in the end, perhaps, I may make another." That
would be my only hope, perhaps, but better than despair. And, after
all, it was a beautiful and curious world.

'But probably, the machine had only been taken away. Still, I must
be calm and patient, find its hiding-place, and recover it by force
or cunning. And with that I scrambled to my feet and looked about
me, wondering where I could bathe. I felt weary, stiff, and
travel-soiled. The freshness of the morning made me desire an equal
freshness. I had exhausted my emotion. Indeed, as I went about
my business, I found myself wondering at my intense excitement
overnight. I made a careful examination of the ground about the
little lawn. I wasted some time in futile questionings, conveyed, as
well as I was able, to such of the little people as came by. They
all failed to understand my gestures; some were simply stolid, some
thought it was a jest and laughed at me. I had the hardest task in
the world to keep my hands off their pretty laughing faces. It was
a foolish impulse, but the devil begotten of fear and blind anger
was ill curbed and still eager to take advantage of my perplexity.
The turf gave better counsel. I found a groove ripped in it, about
midway between the pedestal of the sphinx and the marks of my feet
where, on arrival, I had struggled with the overturned machine.
There were other signs of removal about, with queer narrow
footprints like those I could imagine made by a sloth. This directed
my closer attention to the pedestal. It was, as I think I have said,
of bronze. It was not a mere block, but highly decorated with deep
framed panels on either side. I went and rapped at these. The
pedestal was hollow. Examining the panels with care I found them
discontinuous with the frames. There were no handles or keyholes,
but possibly the panels, if they were doors, as I supposed, opened
from within. One thing was clear enough to my mind. It took no very
great mental effort to infer that my Time Machine was inside that
pedestal. But how it got there was a different problem.

'I saw the heads of two orange-clad people coming through the bushes
and under some blossom-covered apple-trees towards me. I turned
smiling to them and beckoned them to me. They came, and then,
pointing to the bronze pedestal, I tried to intimate my wish to open
it. But at my first gesture towards this they behaved very oddly. I
don't know how to convey their expression to you. Suppose you were
to use a grossly improper gesture to a delicate-minded woman--it is
how she would look. They went off as if they had received the last
possible insult. I tried a sweet-looking little chap in white next,
with exactly the same result. Somehow, his manner made me feel
ashamed of myself. But, as you know, I wanted the Time Machine, and
I tried him once more. As he turned off, like the others, my temper
got the better of me. In three strides I was after him, had him by
the loose part of his robe round the neck, and began dragging him
towards the sphinx. Then I saw the horror and repugnance of his
face, and all of a sudden I let him go.

'But I was not beaten yet. I banged with my fist at the bronze
panels. I thought I heard something stir inside--to be explicit,
I thought I heard a sound like a chuckle--but I must have been
mistaken. Then I got a big pebble from the river, and came and
hammered till I had flattened a coil in the decorations, and the
verdigris came off in powdery flakes. The delicate little people
must have heard me hammering in gusty outbreaks a mile away on
either hand, but nothing came of it. I saw a crowd of them upon the
slopes, looking furtively at me. At last, hot and tired, I sat down
to watch the place. But I was too restless to watch long; I am too
Occidental for a long vigil. I could work at a problem for years,
but to wait inactive for twenty-four hours--that is another matter.

'I got up after a time, and began walking aimlessly through the
bushes towards the hill again. "Patience," said I to myself. "If you
want your machine again you must leave that sphinx alone. If they
mean to take your machine away, it's little good your wrecking their
bronze panels, and if they don't, you will get it back as soon as
you can ask for it. To sit among all those unknown things before a
puzzle like that is hopeless. That way lies monomania. Face this
world. Learn its ways, watch it, be careful of too hasty guesses
at its meaning. In the end you will find clues to it all." Then
suddenly the humour of the situation came into my mind: the thought
of the years I had spent in study and toil to get into the future
age, and now my passion of anxiety to get out of it. I had made
myself the most complicated and the most hopeless trap that ever a
man devised. Although it was at my own expense, I could not help
myself. I laughed aloud.

'Going through the big palace, it seemed to me that the little
people avoided me. It may have been my fancy, or it may have had
something to do with my hammering at the gates of bronze. Yet I felt
tolerably sure of the avoidance. I was careful, however, to show no
concern and to abstain from any pursuit of them, and in the course
of a day or two things got back to the old footing. I made what
progress I could in the language, and in addition I pushed my
explorations here and there. Either I missed some subtle point or
their language was excessively simple--almost exclusively composed
of concrete substantives and verbs. There seemed to be few, if any,
abstract terms, or little use of figurative language. Their
sentences were usually simple and of two words, and I failed to
convey or understand any but the simplest propositions. I determined
to put the thought of my Time Machine and the mystery of the bronze
doors under the sphinx as much as possible in a corner of memory,
until my growing knowledge would lead me back to them in a natural
way. Yet a certain feeling, you may understand, tethered me in a
circle of a few miles round the point of my arrival.

'So far as I could see, all the world displayed the same exuberant
richness as the Thames valley. From every hill I climbed I saw the
same abundance of splendid buildings, endlessly varied in material
and style, the same clustering thickets of evergreens, the same
blossom-laden trees and tree-ferns. Here and there water shone like
silver, and beyond, the land rose into blue undulating hills, and
so faded into the serenity of the sky. A peculiar feature, which
presently attracted my attention, was the presence of certain
circular wells, several, as it seemed to me, of a very great depth.
One lay by the path up the hill, which I had followed during my
first walk. Like the others, it was rimmed with bronze, curiously
wrought, and protected by a little cupola from the rain. Sitting by
the side of these wells, and peering down into the shafted darkness,
I could see no gleam of water, nor could I start any reflection
with a lighted match. But in all of them I heard a certain sound:
a thud--thud--thud, like the beating of some big engine; and I
discovered, from the flaring of my matches, that a steady current of
air set down the shafts. Further, I threw a scrap of paper into the
throat of one, and, instead of fluttering slowly down, it was at
once sucked swiftly out of sight.

'After a time, too, I came to connect these wells with tall towers
standing here and there upon the slopes; for above them there was
often just such a flicker in the air as one sees on a hot day above
a sun-scorched beach. Putting things together, I reached a strong
suggestion of an extensive system of subterranean ventilation, whose
true import it was difficult to imagine. I was at first inclined to
associate it with the sanitary apparatus of these people. It was an
obvious conclusion, but it was absolutely wrong.

'And here I must admit that I learned very little of drains and
bells and modes of conveyance, and the like conveniences, during my
time in this real future. In some of these visions of Utopias and
coming times which I have read, there is a vast amount of detail
about building, and social arrangements, and so forth. But while
such details are easy enough to obtain when the whole world is
contained in one's imagination, they are altogether inaccessible to
a real traveller amid such realities as I found here. Conceive the
tale of London which a man, fresh from Central Africa, would take
back to his tribe! What would he know of railway companies, of
social movements, of telephone and telegraph wires, of the Parcels
Delivery Company, and postal orders and the like? Yet we, at least,
should be willing enough to explain these things to him! And even of
what he knew, how much could he make his untravelled friend either
apprehend or believe? Then, think how narrow the gap between a man
and a white man of our own times, and how wide the interval between
myself and these of the Golden Age! I was sensible of much which was
unseen, and which contributed to my comfort; but save for a general
impression of automatic organization, I fear I can convey very
little of the difference to your mind.

'In the matter of sepulture, for instance, I could see no signs of
crematoria nor anything suggestive of tombs. But it occurred to me
that, possibly, there might be cemeteries (or crematoria) somewhere
beyond the range of my explorings. This, again, was a question I
deliberately put to myself, and my curiosity was at first entirely
defeated upon the point. The thing puzzled me, and I was led to make
a further remark, which puzzled me still more: that aged and infirm
among this people there were none.

'I must confess that my satisfaction with my first theories of an
automatic civilization and a decadent humanity did not long endure.
Yet I could think of no other. Let me put my difficulties. The
several big palaces I had explored were mere living places, great
dining-halls and sleeping apartments. I could find no machinery, no
appliances of any kind. Yet these people were clothed in pleasant
fabrics that must at times need renewal, and their sandals, though
undecorated, were fairly complex specimens of metalwork. Somehow
such things must be made. And the little people displayed no vestige
of a creative tendency. There were no shops, no workshops, no sign
of importations among them. They spent all their time in playing
gently, in bathing in the river, in making love in a half-playful
fashion, in eating fruit and sleeping. I could not see how things
were kept going.

'Then, again, about the Time Machine: something, I knew not what,
had taken it into the hollow pedestal of the White Sphinx. Why? For
the life of me I could not imagine. Those waterless wells, too,
those flickering pillars. I felt I lacked a clue. I felt--how shall
I put it? Suppose you found an inscription, with sentences here and
there in excellent plain English, and interpolated therewith, others
made up of words, of letters even, absolutely unknown to you? Well,
on the third day of my visit, that was how the world of Eight
Hundred and Two Thousand Seven Hundred and One presented itself to
me!

'That day, too, I made a friend--of a sort. It happened that, as I
was watching some of the little people bathing in a shallow, one of
them was seized with cramp and began drifting downstream. The main
current ran rather swiftly, but not too strongly for even a moderate
swimmer. It will give you an idea, therefore, of the strange
deficiency in these creatures, when I tell you that none made the
slightest attempt to rescue the weakly crying little thing which
was drowning before their eyes. When I realized this, I hurriedly
slipped off my clothes, and, wading in at a point lower down, I
caught the poor mite and drew her safe to land. A little rubbing of
the limbs soon brought her round, and I had the satisfaction of
seeing she was all right before I left her. I had got to such a low
estimate of her kind that I did not expect any gratitude from her.
In that, however, I was wrong.

'This happened in the morning. In the afternoon I met my little
woman, as I believe it was, as I was returning towards my centre
from an exploration, and she received me with cries of delight and
presented me with a big garland of flowers--evidently made for me
and me alone. The thing took my imagination. Very possibly I had
been feeling desolate. At any rate I did my best to display my
appreciation of the gift. We were soon seated together in a little
stone arbour, engaged in conversation, chiefly of smiles. The
creature's friendliness affected me exactly as a child's might have
done. We passed each other flowers, and she kissed my hands. I did
the same to hers. Then I tried talk, and found that her name was
Weena, which, though I don't know what it meant, somehow seemed
appropriate enough. That was the beginning of a queer friendship
which lasted a week, and ended--as I will tell you!

'She was exactly like a child. She wanted to be with me always. She
tried to follow me everywhere, and on my next journey out and about
it went to my heart to tire her down, and leave her at last,
exhausted and calling after me rather plaintively. But the problems
of the world had to be mastered. I had not, I said to myself, come
into the future to carry on a miniature flirtation. Yet her distress
when I left her was very great, her expostulations at the parting
were sometimes frantic, and I think, altogether, I had as much
trouble as comfort from her devotion. Nevertheless she was, somehow,
a very great comfort. I thought it was mere childish affection that
made her cling to me. Until it was too late, I did not clearly know
what I had inflicted upon her when I left her. Nor until it was too
late did I clearly understand what she was to me. For, by merely
seeming fond of me, and showing in her weak, futile way that she
cared for me, the little doll of a creature presently gave my return
to the neighbourhood of the White Sphinx almost the feeling of
coming home; and I would watch for her tiny figure of white and gold
so soon as I came over the hill.

'It was from her, too, that I learned that fear had not yet left the
world. She was fearless enough in the daylight, and she had the
oddest confidence in me; for once, in a foolish moment, I made
threatening grimaces at her, and she simply laughed at them. But she
dreaded the dark, dreaded shadows, dreaded black things. Darkness
to her was the one thing dreadful. It was a singularly passionate
emotion, and it set me thinking and observing. I discovered then,
among other things, that these little people gathered into the great
houses after dark, and slept in droves. To enter upon them without a
light was to put them into a tumult of apprehension. I never found
one out of doors, or one sleeping alone within doors, after dark.
Yet I was still such a blockhead that I missed the lesson of that
fear, and in spite of Weena's distress I insisted upon sleeping away
from these slumbering multitudes.

'It troubled her greatly, but in the end her odd affection for me
triumphed, and for five of the nights of our acquaintance, including
the last night of all, she slept with her head pillowed on my arm.
But my story slips away from me as I speak of her. It must have been
the night before her rescue that I was awakened about dawn. I had
been restless, dreaming most disagreeably that I was drowned, and
that sea anemones were feeling over my face with their soft palps.
I woke with a start, and with an odd fancy that some greyish animal
had just rushed out of the chamber. I tried to get to sleep again,
but I felt restless and uncomfortable. It was that dim grey hour
when things are just creeping out of darkness, when everything is
colourless and clear cut, and yet unreal. I got up, and went down
into the great hall, and so out upon the flagstones in front of the
palace. I thought I would make a virtue of necessity, and see the
sunrise.

'The moon was setting, and the dying moonlight and the first pallor
of dawn were mingled in a ghastly half-light. The bushes were inky
black, the ground a sombre grey, the sky colourless and cheerless.
And up the hill I thought I could see ghosts. There several times,
as I scanned the slope, I saw white figures. Twice I fancied I saw
a solitary white, ape-like creature running rather quickly up the
hill, and once near the ruins I saw a leash of them carrying some
dark body. They moved hastily. I did not see what became of them.
It seemed that they vanished among the bushes. The dawn was still
indistinct, you must understand. I was feeling that chill,
uncertain, early-morning feeling you may have known. I doubted
my eyes.

'As the eastern sky grew brighter, and the light of the day came on
and its vivid colouring returned upon the world once more, I scanned
the view keenly. But I saw no vestige of my white figures. They were
mere creatures of the half light. "They must have been ghosts," I
said; "I wonder whence they dated." For a queer notion of Grant
Allen's came into my head, and amused me. If each generation die and
leave ghosts, he argued, the world at last will get overcrowded with
them. On that theory they would have grown innumerable some Eight
Hundred Thousand Years hence, and it was no great wonder to see four
at once. But the jest was unsatisfying, and I was thinking of these
figures all the morning, until Weena's rescue drove them out of my
head. I associated them in some indefinite way with the white animal
I had startled in my first passionate search for the Time Machine.
But Weena was a pleasant substitute. Yet all the same, they were
soon destined to take far deadlier possession of my mind.

'I think I have said how much hotter than our own was the weather
of this Golden Age. I cannot account for it. It may be that the sun
was hotter, or the earth nearer the sun. It is usual to assume that
the sun will go on cooling steadily in the future. But people,
unfamiliar with such speculations as those of the younger Darwin,
forget that the planets must ultimately fall back one by one into
the parent body. As these catastrophes occur, the sun will blaze
with renewed energy; and it may be that some inner planet had
suffered this fate. Whatever the reason, the fact remains that the
sun was very much hotter than we know it.

'Well, one very hot morning--my fourth, I think--as I was seeking
shelter from the heat and glare in a colossal ruin near the great
house where I slept and fed, there happened this strange thing:
Clambering among these heaps of masonry, I found a narrow gallery,
whose end and side windows were blocked by fallen masses of stone.
By contrast with the brilliancy outside, it seemed at first
impenetrably dark to me. I entered it groping, for the change from
light to blackness made spots of colour swim before me. Suddenly I
halted spellbound. A pair of eyes, luminous by reflection against
the daylight without, was watching me out of the darkness.

'The old instinctive dread of wild beasts came upon me. I clenched
my hands and steadfastly looked into the glaring eyeballs. I was
afraid to turn. Then the thought of the absolute security in which
humanity appeared to be living came to my mind. And then I
remembered that strange terror of the dark. Overcoming my fear to
some extent, I advanced a step and spoke. I will admit that my
voice was harsh and ill-controlled. I put out my hand and touched
something soft. At once the eyes darted sideways, and something
white ran past me. I turned with my heart in my mouth, and saw a
queer little ape-like figure, its head held down in a peculiar
manner, running across the sunlit space behind me. It blundered
against a block of granite, staggered aside, and in a moment was
hidden in a black shadow beneath another pile of ruined masonry.

'My impression of it is, of course, imperfect; but I know it was a
dull white, and had strange large greyish-red eyes; also that there
was flaxen hair on its head and down its back. But, as I say, it
went too fast for me to see distinctly. I cannot even say whether it
ran on all-fours, or only with its forearms held very low. After an
instant's pause I followed it into the second heap of ruins. I could
not find it at first; but, after a time in the profound obscurity, I
came upon one of those round well-like openings of which I have told
you, half closed by a fallen pillar. A sudden thought came to me.
Could this Thing have vanished down the shaft? I lit a match, and,
looking down, I saw a small, white, moving creature, with large
bright eyes which regarded me steadfastly as it retreated. It made
me shudder. It was so like a human spider! It was clambering down
the wall, and now I saw for the first time a number of metal foot
and hand rests forming a kind of ladder down the shaft. Then the
light burned my fingers and fell out of my hand, going out as it
dropped, and when I had lit another the little monster had
disappeared.

'I do not know how long I sat peering down that well. It was not for
some time that I could succeed in persuading myself that the thing I
had seen was human. But, gradually, the truth dawned on me: that
Man had not remained one species, but had differentiated into two
distinct animals: that my graceful children of the Upper-world were
not the sole descendants of our generation, but that this bleached,
obscene, nocturnal Thing, which had flashed before me, was also heir
to all the ages.

'I thought of the flickering pillars and of my theory of an
underground ventilation. I began to suspect their true import. And
what, I wondered, was this Lemur doing in my scheme of a perfectly
balanced organization? How was it related to the indolent serenity
of the beautiful Upper-worlders? And what was hidden down there,
at the foot of that shaft? I sat upon the edge of the well telling
myself that, at any rate, there was nothing to fear, and that there
I must descend for the solution of my difficulties. And withal I
was absolutely afraid to go! As I hesitated, two of the beautiful
Upper-world people came running in their amorous sport across the
daylight in the shadow. The male pursued the female, flinging
flowers at her as he ran.

'They seemed distressed to find me, my arm against the overturned
pillar, peering down the well. Apparently it was considered bad form
to remark these apertures; for when I pointed to this one, and tried
to frame a question about it in their tongue, they were still more
visibly distressed and turned away. But they were interested by my
matches, and I struck some to amuse them. I tried them again about
the well, and again I failed. So presently I left them, meaning to
go back to Weena, and see what I could get from her. But my mind was
already in revolution; my guesses and impressions were slipping and
sliding to a new adjustment. I had now a clue to the import of these
wells, to the ventilating towers, to the mystery of the ghosts; to
say nothing of a hint at the meaning of the bronze gates and the
fate of the Time Machine! And very vaguely there came a suggestion
towards the solution of the economic problem that had puzzled me.

'Here was the new view. Plainly, this second species of Man was
subterranean. There were three circumstances in particular which
made me think that its rare emergence above ground was the outcome
of a long-continued underground habit. In the first place, there was
the bleached look common in most animals that live largely in the
dark--the white fish of the Kentucky caves, for instance. Then,
those large eyes, with that capacity for reflecting light, are
common features of nocturnal things--witness the owl and the cat.
And last of all, that evident confusion in the sunshine, that hasty
yet fumbling awkward flight towards dark shadow, and that peculiar
carriage of the head while in the light--all reinforced the theory
of an extreme sensitiveness of the retina.

'Beneath my feet, then, the earth must be tunnelled enormously, and
these tunnellings were the habitat of the new race. The presence of
ventilating shafts and wells along the hill slopes--everywhere, in
fact, except along the river valley--showed how universal were its
ramifications. What so natural, then, as to assume that it was in
this artificial Underworld that such work as was necessary to the
comfort of the daylight race was done? The notion was so plausible
that I at once accepted it, and went on to assume the how of this
splitting of the human species. I dare say you will anticipate the
shape of my theory; though, for myself, I very soon felt that it
fell far short of the truth.

'At first, proceeding from the problems of our own age, it seemed
clear as daylight to me that the gradual widening of the present
merely temporary and social difference between the Capitalist and
the Labourer, was the key to the whole position. No doubt it will
seem grotesque enough to you--and wildly incredible!--and yet even
now there are existing circumstances to point that way. There is
a tendency to utilize underground space for the less ornamental
purposes of civilization; there is the Metropolitan Railway in
London, for instance, there are new electric railways, there are
subways, there are underground workrooms and restaurants, and they
increase and multiply. Evidently, I thought, this tendency had
increased till Industry had gradually lost its birthright in the
sky. I mean that it had gone deeper and deeper into larger and ever
larger underground factories, spending a still-increasing amount of
its time therein, till, in the end--! Even now, does not an East-end
worker live in such artificial conditions as practically to be cut
off from the natural surface of the earth?

'Again, the exclusive tendency of richer people--due, no doubt, to
the increasing refinement of their education, and the widening gulf
between them and the rude violence of the poor--is already leading
to the closing, in their interest, of considerable portions of the
surface of the land. About London, for instance, perhaps half the
prettier country is shut in against intrusion. And this same
widening gulf--which is due to the length and expense of the higher
educational process and the increased facilities for and temptations
towards refined habits on the part of the rich--will make that
exchange between class and class, that promotion by intermarriage
which at present retards the splitting of our species along lines
of social stratification, less and less frequent. So, in the end,
above ground you must have the Haves, pursuing pleasure and comfort
and beauty, and below ground the Have-nots, the Workers getting
continually adapted to the conditions of their labour. Once they
were there, they would no doubt have to pay rent, and not a little
of it, for the ventilation of their caverns; and if they refused,
they would starve or be suffocated for arrears. Such of them as were
so constituted as to be miserable and rebellious would die; and, in
the end, the balance being permanent, the survivors would become as
well adapted to the conditions of underground life, and as happy in
their way, as the Upper-world people were to theirs. As it seemed to
me, the refined beauty and the etiolated pallor followed naturally
enough.

'The great triumph of Humanity I had dreamed of took a different
shape in my mind. It had been no such triumph of moral education and
general co-operation as I had imagined. Instead, I saw a real
aristocracy, armed with a perfected science and working to a logical
conclusion the industrial system of to-day. Its triumph had not been
simply a triumph over Nature, but a triumph over Nature and the
fellow-man. This, I must warn you, was my theory at the time. I had
no convenient cicerone in the pattern of the Utopian books. My
explanation may be absolutely wrong. I still think it is the
most plausible one. But even on this supposition the balanced
civilization that was at last attained must have long since passed
its zenith, and was now far fallen into decay. The too-perfect
security of the Upper-worlders had led them to a slow movement of
degeneration, to a general dwindling in size, strength, and
intelligence. That I could see clearly enough already. What had
happened to the Under-grounders I did not yet suspect; but from what
I had seen of the Morlocks--that, by the by, was the name by which
these creatures were called--I could imagine that the modification
of the human type was even far more profound than among the "Eloi,"
the beautiful race that I already knew.

'Then came troublesome doubts. Why had the Morlocks taken my Time
Machine? For I felt sure it was they who had taken it. Why, too, if
the Eloi were masters, could they not restore the machine to me? And
why were they so terribly afraid of the dark? I proceeded, as I have
said, to question Weena about this Under-world, but here again I was
disappointed. At first she would not understand my questions, and
presently she refused to answer them. She shivered as though the
topic was unendurable. And when I pressed her, perhaps a little
harshly, she burst into tears. They were the only tears, except my
own, I ever saw in that Golden Age. When I saw them I ceased
abruptly to trouble about the Morlocks, and was only concerned in
banishing these signs of the human inheritance from Weena's eyes.
And very soon she was smiling and clapping her hands, while I
solemnly burned a match.

VI

'It may seem odd to you, but it was two days before I could follow
up the new-found clue in what was manifestly the proper way. I felt
a peculiar shrinking from those pallid bodies. They were just the
half-bleached colour of the worms and things one sees preserved in
spirit in a zoological museum. And they were filthily cold to the
touch. Probably my shrinking was largely due to the sympathetic
influence of the Eloi, whose disgust of the Morlocks I now began
to appreciate.

'The next night I did not sleep well. Probably my health was a
little disordered. I was oppressed with perplexity and doubt. Once
or twice I had a feeling of intense fear for which I could perceive
no definite reason. I remember creeping noiselessly into the great
hall where the little people were sleeping in the moonlight--that
night Weena was among them--and feeling reassured by their presence.
It occurred to me even then, that in the course of a few days the
moon must pass through its last quarter, and the nights grow dark,
when the appearances of these unpleasant creatures from below, these
whitened Lemurs, this new vermin that had replaced the old, might be
more abundant. And on both these days I had the restless feeling of
one who shirks an inevitable duty. I felt assured that the Time
Machine was only to be recovered by boldly penetrating these
underground mysteries. Yet I could not face the mystery. If only I
had had a companion it would have been different. But I was so
horribly alone, and even to clamber down into the darkness of the
well appalled me. I don't know if you will understand my feeling,
but I never felt quite safe at my back.

'It was this restlessness, this insecurity, perhaps, that drove me
further and further afield in my exploring expeditions. Going to the
south-westward towards the rising country that is now called Combe
Wood, I observed far off, in the direction of nineteenth-century
Banstead, a vast green structure, different in character from any
I had hitherto seen. It was larger than the largest of the palaces
or ruins I knew, and the facade had an Oriental look: the face
of it having the lustre, as well as the pale-green tint, a kind
of bluish-green, of a certain type of Chinese porcelain. This
difference in aspect suggested a difference in use, and I was minded
to push on and explore. But the day was growing late, and I had come
upon the sight of the place after a long and tiring circuit; so I
resolved to hold over the adventure for the following day, and I
returned to the welcome and the caresses of little Weena. But next
morning I perceived clearly enough that my curiosity regarding the
Palace of Green Porcelain was a piece of self-deception, to enable
me to shirk, by another day, an experience I dreaded. I resolved I
would make the descent without further waste of time, and started
out in the early morning towards a well near the ruins of granite
and aluminium.

'Little Weena ran with me. She danced beside me to the well, but
when she saw me lean over the mouth and look downward, she seemed
strangely disconcerted. "Good-bye, little Weena," I said, kissing
her; and then putting her down, I began to feel over the parapet
for the climbing hooks. Rather hastily, I may as well confess, for
I feared my courage might leak away! At first she watched me in
amazement. Then she gave a most piteous cry, and running to me, she
began to pull at me with her little hands. I think her opposition
nerved me rather to proceed. I shook her off, perhaps a little
roughly, and in another moment I was in the throat of the well. I
saw her agonized face over the parapet, and smiled to reassure her.
Then I had to look down at the unstable hooks to which I clung.

'I had to clamber down a shaft of perhaps two hundred yards. The
descent was effected by means of metallic bars projecting from
the sides of the well, and these being adapted to the needs of
a creature much smaller and lighter than myself, I was speedily
cramped and fatigued by the descent. And not simply fatigued! One of
the bars bent suddenly under my weight, and almost swung me off into
the blackness beneath. For a moment I hung by one hand, and after
that experience I did not dare to rest again. Though my arms and
back were presently acutely painful, I went on clambering down the
sheer descent with as quick a motion as possible. Glancing upward,
I saw the aperture, a small blue disk, in which a star was visible,
while little Weena's head showed as a round black projection. The
thudding sound of a machine below grew louder and more oppressive.
Everything save that little disk above was profoundly dark, and when
I looked up again Weena had disappeared.

'I was in an agony of discomfort. I had some thought of trying to go
up the shaft again, and leave the Under-world alone. But even while
I turned this over in my mind I continued to descend. At last, with
intense relief, I saw dimly coming up, a foot to the right of me, a
slender loophole in the wall. Swinging myself in, I found it was the
aperture of a narrow horizontal tunnel in which I could lie down and
rest. It was not too soon. My arms ached, my back was cramped, and I
was trembling with the prolonged terror of a fall. Besides this, the
unbroken darkness had had a distressing effect upon my eyes. The air
was full of the throb and hum of machinery pumping air down the
shaft.

'I do not know how long I lay. I was roused by a soft hand touching
my face. Starting up in the darkness I snatched at my matches and,
hastily striking one, I saw three stooping white creatures similar
to the one I had seen above ground in the ruin, hastily retreating
before the light. Living, as they did, in what appeared to me
impenetrable darkness, their eyes were abnormally large and
sensitive, just as are the pupils of the abysmal fishes, and they
reflected the light in the same way. I have no doubt they could see
me in that rayless obscurity, and they did not seem to have any fear
of me apart from the light. But, so soon as I struck a match in
order to see them, they fled incontinently, vanishing into dark
gutters and tunnels, from which their eyes glared at me in the
strangest fashion.

'I tried to call to them, but the language they had was apparently
different from that of the Over-world people; so that I was needs
left to my own unaided efforts, and the thought of flight before
exploration was even then in my mind. But I said to myself, "You are
in for it now," and, feeling my way along the tunnel, I found the
noise of machinery grow louder. Presently the walls fell away from
me, and I came to a large open space, and striking another match,
saw that I had entered a vast arched cavern, which stretched into
utter darkness beyond the range of my light. The view I had of it
was as much as one could see in the burning of a match.

'Necessarily my memory is vague. Great shapes like big machines rose
out of the dimness, and cast grotesque black shadows, in which dim
spectral Morlocks sheltered from the glare. The place, by the by,
was very stuffy and oppressive, and the faint halitus of freshly
shed blood was in the air. Some way down the central vista was a
little table of white metal, laid with what seemed a meal. The
Morlocks at any rate were carnivorous! Even at the time, I remember
wondering what large animal could have survived to furnish the red
joint I saw. It was all very indistinct: the heavy smell, the big
unmeaning shapes, the obscene figures lurking in the shadows, and
only waiting for the darkness to come at me again! Then the match
burned down, and stung my fingers, and fell, a wriggling red spot
in the blackness.

'I have thought since how particularly ill-equipped I was for such
an experience. When I had started with the Time Machine, I had
started with the absurd assumption that the men of the Future would
certainly be infinitely ahead of ourselves in all their appliances.
I had come without arms, without medicine, without anything to
smoke--at times I missed tobacco frightfully--even without enough
matches. If only I had thought of a Kodak! I could have flashed that
glimpse of the Underworld in a second, and examined it at leisure.
But, as it was, I stood there with only the weapons and the powers
that Nature had endowed me with--hands, feet, and teeth; these, and
four safety-matches that still remained to me.

'I was afraid to push my way in among all this machinery in the
dark, and it was only with my last glimpse of light I discovered
that my store of matches had run low. It had never occurred to me
until that moment that there was any need to economize them, and I
had wasted almost half the box in astonishing the Upper-worlders, to
whom fire was a novelty. Now, as I say, I had four left, and while I
stood in the dark, a hand touched mine, lank fingers came feeling
over my face, and I was sensible of a peculiar unpleasant odour. I
fancied I heard the breathing of a crowd of those dreadful little
beings about me. I felt the box of matches in my hand being gently
disengaged, and other hands behind me plucking at my clothing. The
sense of these unseen creatures examining me was indescribably
unpleasant. The sudden realization of my ignorance of their ways of
thinking and doing came home to me very vividly in the darkness. I
shouted at them as loudly as I could. They started away, and then
I could feel them approaching me again. They clutched at me more
boldly, whispering odd sounds to each other. I shivered violently,
and shouted again--rather discordantly. This time they were not so
seriously alarmed, and they made a queer laughing noise as they came
back at me. I will confess I was horribly frightened. I determined
to strike another match and escape under the protection of its
glare. I did so, and eking out the flicker with a scrap of paper
from my pocket, I made good my retreat to the narrow tunnel. But I
had scarce entered this when my light was blown out and in the
blackness I could hear the Morlocks rustling like wind among leaves,
and pattering like the rain, as they hurried after me.

'In a moment I was clutched by several hands, and there was no
mistaking that they were trying to haul me back. I struck another
light, and waved it in their dazzled faces. You can scarce imagine
how nauseatingly inhuman they looked--those pale, chinless faces
and great, lidless, pinkish-grey eyes!--as they stared in their
blindness and bewilderment. But I did not stay to look, I promise
you: I retreated again, and when my second match had ended, I struck
my third. It had almost burned through when I reached the opening
into the shaft. I lay down on the edge, for the throb of the great
pump below made me giddy. Then I felt sideways for the projecting
hooks, and, as I did so, my feet were grasped from behind, and I
was violently tugged backward. I lit my last match ... and it
incontinently went out. But I had my hand on the climbing bars now,
and, kicking violently, I disengaged myself from the clutches of the
Morlocks and was speedily clambering up the shaft, while they stayed
peering and blinking up at me: all but one little wretch who
followed me for some way, and well-nigh secured my boot as a trophy.

'That climb seemed interminable to me. With the last twenty or
thirty feet of it a deadly nausea came upon me. I had the greatest
difficulty in keeping my hold. The last few yards was a frightful
struggle against this faintness. Several times my head swam, and I
felt all the sensations of falling. At last, however, I got over the
well-mouth somehow, and staggered out of the ruin into the blinding
sunlight. I fell upon my face. Even the soil smelt sweet and clean.
Then I remember Weena kissing my hands and ears, and the voices of
others among the Eloi. Then, for a time, I was insensible.

VII

'Now, indeed, I seemed in a worse case than before. Hitherto,
except during my night's anguish at the loss of the Time Machine,
I had felt a sustaining hope of ultimate escape, but that hope was
staggered by these new discoveries. Hitherto I had merely thought
myself impeded by the childish simplicity of the little people, and
by some unknown forces which I had only to understand to overcome;
but there was an altogether new element in the sickening quality of
the Morlocks--a something inhuman and malign. Instinctively I
loathed them. Before, I had felt as a man might feel who had fallen
into a pit: my concern was with the pit and how to get out of it.
Now I felt like a beast in a trap, whose enemy would come upon him
soon.

'The enemy I dreaded may surprise you. It was the darkness of the
new moon. Weena had put this into my head by some at first
incomprehensible remarks about the Dark Nights. It was not now
such a very difficult problem to guess what the coming Dark Nights
might mean. The moon was on the wane: each night there was a longer
interval of darkness. And I now understood to some slight degree at
least the reason of the fear of the little Upper-world people for
the dark. I wondered vaguely what foul villainy it might be that
the Morlocks did under the new moon. I felt pretty sure now that
my second hypothesis was all wrong. The Upper-world people might
once have been the favoured aristocracy, and the Morlocks their
mechanical servants: but that had long since passed away. The two
species that had resulted from the evolution of man were sliding
down towards, or had already arrived at, an altogether new
relationship. The Eloi, like the Carolingian kings, had decayed
to a mere beautiful futility. They still possessed the earth on
sufferance: since the Morlocks, subterranean for innumerable
generations, had come at last to find the daylit surface
intolerable. And the Morlocks made their garments, I inferred, and
maintained them in their habitual needs, perhaps through the
survival of an old habit of service. They did it as a standing horse
paws with his foot, or as a man enjoys killing animals in sport:
because ancient and departed necessities had impressed it on the
organism. But, clearly, the old order was already in part reversed.
The Nemesis of the delicate ones was creeping on apace. Ages ago,
thousands of generations ago, man had thrust his brother man out of
the ease and the sunshine. And now that brother was coming back
changed! Already the Eloi had begun to learn one old lesson anew.
They were becoming reacquainted with Fear. And suddenly there came
into my head the memory of the meat I had seen in the Under-world.
It seemed odd how it floated into my mind: not stirred up as it
were by the current of my meditations, but coming in almost like a
question from outside. I tried to recall the form of it. I had a
vague sense of something familiar, but I could not tell what it was
at the time.

'Still, however helpless the little people in the presence of their
mysterious Fear, I was differently constituted. I came out of this
age of ours, this ripe prime of the human race, when Fear does not
paralyse and mystery has lost its terrors. I at least would defend
myself. Without further delay I determined to make myself arms and a
fastness where I might sleep. With that refuge as a base, I could
face this strange world with some of that confidence I had lost in
realizing to what creatures night by night I lay exposed. I felt
I could never sleep again until my bed was secure from them. I
shuddered with horror to think how they must already have examined
me.

'I wandered during the afternoon along the valley of the Thames, but
found nothing that commended itself to my mind as inaccessible. All
the buildings and trees seemed easily practicable to such dexterous
climbers as the Morlocks, to judge by their wells, must be. Then the
tall pinnacles of the Palace of Green Porcelain and the polished
gleam of its walls came back to my memory; and in the evening,
taking Weena like a child upon my shoulder, I went up the hills
towards the south-west. The distance, I had reckoned, was seven or
eight miles, but it must have been nearer eighteen. I had first seen
the place on a moist afternoon when distances are deceptively
diminished. In addition, the heel of one of my shoes was loose, and
a nail was working through the sole--they were comfortable old shoes
I wore about indoors--so that I was lame. And it was already long
past sunset when I came in sight of the palace, silhouetted black
against the pale yellow of the sky.

'Weena had been hugely delighted when I began to carry her, but
after a while she desired me to let her down, and ran along by the
side of me, occasionally darting off on either hand to pick flowers
to stick in my pockets. My pockets had always puzzled Weena, but at
the last she had concluded that they were an eccentric kind of vase
for floral decoration. At least she utilized them for that purpose.
And that reminds me! In changing my jacket I found...'

The Time Traveller paused, put his hand into his pocket, and
silently placed two withered flowers, not unlike very large white
mallows, upon the little table. Then he resumed his narrative.

'As the hush of evening crept over the world and we proceeded over
the hill crest towards Wimbledon, Weena grew tired and wanted to
return to the house of grey stone. But I pointed out the distant
pinnacles of the Palace of Green Porcelain to her, and contrived to
make her understand that we were seeking a refuge there from her
Fear. You know that great pause that comes upon things before the
dusk? Even the breeze stops in the trees. To me there is always an
air of expectation about that evening stillness. The sky was clear,
remote, and empty save for a few horizontal bars far down in the
sunset. Well, that night the expectation took the colour of my
fears. In that darkling calm my senses seemed preternaturally
sharpened. I fancied I could even feel the hollowness of the ground
beneath my feet: could, indeed, almost see through it the Morlocks
on their ant-hill going hither and thither and waiting for the dark.
In my excitement I fancied that they would receive my invasion of
their burrows as a declaration of war. And why had they taken my
Time Machine?

'So we went on in the quiet, and the twilight deepened into night.
The clear blue of the distance faded, and one star after another
came out. The ground grew dim and the trees black. Weena's fears and
her fatigue grew upon her. I took her in my arms and talked to her
and caressed her. Then, as the darkness grew deeper, she put her
arms round my neck, and, closing her eyes, tightly pressed her face
against my shoulder. So we went down a long slope into a valley, and
there in the dimness I almost walked into a little river. This I
waded, and went up the opposite side of the valley, past a number
of sleeping houses, and by a statue--a Faun, or some such figure,
minus the head. Here too were acacias. So far I had seen nothing of
the Morlocks, but it was yet early in the night, and the darker hours
before the old moon rose were still to come.

'From the brow of the next hill I saw a thick wood spreading wide
and black before me. I hesitated at this. I could see no end to
it, either to the right or the left. Feeling tired--my feet, in
particular, were very sore--I carefully lowered Weena from my
shoulder as I halted, and sat down upon the turf. I could no
longer see the Palace of Green Porcelain, and I was in doubt of my
direction. I looked into the thickness of the wood and thought of
what it might hide. Under that dense tangle of branches one would
be out of sight of the stars. Even were there no other lurking
danger--a danger I did not care to let my imagination loose
upon--there would still be all the roots to stumble over and the
tree-boles to strike against.

'I was very tired, too, after the excitements of the day; so I
decided that I would not face it, but would pass the night upon the
open hill.

'Weena, I was glad to find, was fast asleep. I carefully wrapped her
in my jacket, and sat down beside her to wait for the moonrise. The
hill-side was quiet and deserted, but from the black of the wood
there came now and then a stir of living things. Above me shone the
stars, for the night was very clear. I felt a certain sense of
friendly comfort in their twinkling. All the old constellations
had gone from the sky, however: that slow movement which is
imperceptible in a hundred human lifetimes, had long since
rearranged them in unfamiliar groupings. But the Milky Way, it
seemed to me, was still the same tattered streamer of star-dust as
of yore. Southward (as I judged it) was a very bright red star that
was new to me; it was even more splendid than our own green Sirius.
And amid all these scintillating points of light one bright planet
shone kindly and steadily like the face of an old friend.

'Looking at these stars suddenly dwarfed my own troubles and all
the gravities of terrestrial life. I thought of their unfathomable
distance, and the slow inevitable drift of their movements out of
the unknown past into the unknown future. I thought of the great
precessional cycle that the pole of the earth describes. Only forty
times had that silent revolution occurred during all the years that
I had traversed. And during these few revolutions all the activity,
all the traditions, the complex organizations, the nations,
languages, literatures, aspirations, even the mere memory of Man as
I knew him, had been swept out of existence. Instead were these
frail creatures who had forgotten their high ancestry, and the white
Things of which I went in terror. Then I thought of the Great Fear
that was between the two species, and for the first time, with a
sudden shiver, came the clear knowledge of what the meat I had seen
might be. Yet it was too horrible! I looked at little Weena sleeping
beside me, her face white and starlike under the stars, and
forthwith dismissed the thought.

'Through that long night I held my mind off the Morlocks as well as
I could, and whiled away the time by trying to fancy I could find
signs of the old constellations in the new confusion. The sky kept
very clear, except for a hazy cloud or so. No doubt I dozed at
times. Then, as my vigil wore on, came a faintness in the eastward
sky, like the reflection of some colourless fire, and the old moon
rose, thin and peaked and white. And close behind, and overtaking
it, and overflowing it, the dawn came, pale at first, and then
growing pink and warm. No Morlocks had approached us. Indeed, I had
seen none upon the hill that night. And in the confidence of renewed
day it almost seemed to me that my fear had been unreasonable. I
stood up and found my foot with the loose heel swollen at the ankle
and painful under the heel; so I sat down again, took off my shoes,
and flung them away.

'I awakened Weena, and we went down into the wood, now green and
pleasant instead of black and forbidding. We found some fruit
wherewith to break our fast. We soon met others of the dainty ones,
laughing and dancing in the sunlight as though there was no such
thing in nature as the night. And then I thought once more of the
meat that I had seen. I felt assured now of what it was, and from
the bottom of my heart I pitied this last feeble rill from the great
flood of humanity. Clearly, at some time in the Long-Ago of human
decay the Morlocks' food had run short. Possibly they had lived on
rats and such-like vermin. Even now man is far less discriminating
and exclusive in his food than he was--far less than any monkey. His
prejudice against human flesh is no deep-seated instinct. And so
these inhuman sons of men----! I tried to look at the thing in a
scientific spirit. After all, they were less human and more remote
than our cannibal ancestors of three or four thousand years ago.
And the intelligence that would have made this state of things a
torment had gone. Why should I trouble myself? These Eloi were mere
fatted cattle, which the ant-like Morlocks preserved and preyed
upon--probably saw to the breeding of. And there was Weena dancing
at my side!

'Then I tried to preserve myself from the horror that was coming
upon me, by regarding it as a rigorous punishment of human
selfishness. Man had been content to live in ease and delight upon
the labours of his fellow-man, had taken Necessity as his watchword
and excuse, and in the fullness of time Necessity had come home to
him. I even tried a Carlyle-like scorn of this wretched aristocracy
in decay. But this attitude of mind was impossible. However great
their intellectual degradation, the Eloi had kept too much of the
human form not to claim my sympathy, and to make me perforce a
sharer in their degradation and their Fear.

'I had at that time very vague ideas as to the course I should
pursue. My first was to secure some safe place of refuge, and to
make myself such arms of metal or stone as I could contrive. That
necessity was immediate. In the next place, I hoped to procure some
means of fire, so that I should have the weapon of a torch at hand,
for nothing, I knew, would be more efficient against these Morlocks.
Then I wanted to arrange some contrivance to break open the doors of
bronze under the White Sphinx. I had in mind a battering ram. I had
a persuasion that if I could enter those doors and carry a blaze of
light before me I should discover the Time Machine and escape. I
could not imagine the Morlocks were strong enough to move it far
away. Weena I had resolved to bring with me to our own time. And
turning such schemes over in my mind I pursued our way towards the
building which my fancy had chosen as our dwelling.

VIII

'I found the Palace of Green Porcelain, when we approached it about
noon, deserted and falling into ruin. Only ragged vestiges of glass
remained in its windows, and great sheets of the green facing had
fallen away from the corroded metallic framework. It lay very high
upon a turfy down, and looking north-eastward before I entered it, I
was surprised to see a large estuary, or even creek, where I judged
Wandsworth and Battersea must once have been. I thought then--though
I never followed up the thought--of what might have happened, or
might be happening, to the living things in the sea.

'The material of the Palace proved on examination to be indeed
porcelain, and along the face of it I saw an inscription in some
unknown character. I thought, rather foolishly, that Weena might
help me to interpret this, but I only learned that the bare idea of
writing had never entered her head. She always seemed to me, I
fancy, more human than she was, perhaps because her affection was so
human.

'Within the big valves of the door--which were open and broken--we
found, instead of the customary hall, a long gallery lit by many
side windows. At the first glance I was reminded of a museum.
The tiled floor was thick with dust, and a remarkable array of
miscellaneous objects was shrouded in the same grey covering. Then
I perceived, standing strange and gaunt in the centre of the hall,
what was clearly the lower part of a huge skeleton. I recognized
by the oblique feet that it was some extinct creature after the
fashion of the Megatherium. The skull and the upper bones lay
beside it in the thick dust, and in one place, where rain-water had
dropped through a leak in the roof, the thing itself had been worn
away. Further in the gallery was the huge skeleton barrel of a
Brontosaurus. My museum hypothesis was confirmed. Going towards the
side I found what appeared to be sloping shelves, and clearing away
the thick dust, I found the old familiar glass cases of our own
time. But they must have been air-tight to judge from the fair
preservation of some of their contents.

'Clearly we stood among the ruins of some latter-day South
Kensington! Here, apparently, was the Palaeontological Section,
and a very splendid array of fossils it must have been, though the
inevitable process of decay that had been staved off for a time, and
had, through the extinction of bacteria and fungi, lost ninety-nine
hundredths of its force, was nevertheless, with extreme sureness if
with extreme slowness at work again upon all its treasures. Here and
there I found traces of the little people in the shape of rare
fossils broken to pieces or threaded in strings upon reeds. And the
cases had in some instances been bodily removed--by the Morlocks as
I judged. The place was very silent. The thick dust deadened our
footsteps. Weena, who had been rolling a sea urchin down the sloping
glass of a case, presently came, as I stared about me, and very
quietly took my hand and stood beside me.

'And at first I was so much surprised by this ancient monument of an
intellectual age, that I gave no thought to the possibilities it
presented. Even my preoccupation about the Time Machine receded a
little from my mind.

'To judge from the size of the place, this Palace of Green Porcelain
had a great deal more in it than a Gallery of Palaeontology;
possibly historical galleries; it might be, even a library! To me,
at least in my present circumstances, these would be vastly more
interesting than this spectacle of oldtime geology in decay.
Exploring, I found another short gallery running transversely to the
first. This appeared to be devoted to minerals, and the sight of a
block of sulphur set my mind running on gunpowder. But I could find
no saltpeter; indeed, no nitrates of any kind. Doubtless they had
deliquesced ages ago. Yet the sulphur hung in my mind, and set up a
train of thinking. As for the rest of the contents of that gallery,
though on the whole they were the best preserved of all I saw, I had
little interest. I am no specialist in mineralogy, and I went on
down a very ruinous aisle running parallel to the first hall I had
entered. Apparently this section had been devoted to natural
history, but everything had long since passed out of recognition. A
few shrivelled and blackened vestiges of what had once been stuffed
animals, desiccated mummies in jars that had once held spirit, a
brown dust of departed plants: that was all! I was sorry for that,
because I should have been glad to trace the patent readjustments by
which the conquest of animated nature had been attained. Then we
came to a gallery of simply colossal proportions, but singularly
ill-lit, the floor of it running downward at a slight angle from the
end at which I entered. At intervals white globes hung from the
ceiling--many of them cracked and smashed--which suggested that
originally the place had been artificially lit. Here I was more in
my element, for rising on either side of me were the huge bulks of
big machines, all greatly corroded and many broken down, but some
still fairly complete. You know I have a certain weakness for
mechanism, and I was inclined to linger among these; the more so as
for the most part they had the interest of puzzles, and I could make
only the vaguest guesses at what they were for. I fancied that if
I could solve their puzzles I should find myself in possession of
powers that might be of use against the Morlocks.

'Suddenly Weena came very close to my side. So suddenly that she
startled me. Had it not been for her I do not think I should have
noticed that the floor of the gallery sloped at all. [Footnote: It
may be, of course, that the floor did not slope, but that the museum
was built into the side of a hill.--ED.] The end I had come in at
was quite above ground, and was lit by rare slit-like windows. As
you went down the length, the ground came up against these windows,
until at last there was a pit like the "area" of a London house
before each, and only a narrow line of daylight at the top. I went
slowly along, puzzling about the machines, and had been too intent
upon them to notice the gradual diminution of the light, until
Weena's increasing apprehensions drew my attention. Then I saw that
the gallery ran down at last into a thick darkness. I hesitated, and
then, as I looked round me, I saw that the dust was less abundant
and its surface less even. Further away towards the dimness, it
appeared to be broken by a number of small narrow footprints. My
sense of the immediate presence of the Morlocks revived at that.
I felt that I was wasting my time in the academic examination of
machinery. I called to mind that it was already far advanced in the
afternoon, and that I had still no weapon, no refuge, and no means
of making a fire. And then down in the remote blackness of the
gallery I heard a peculiar pattering, and the same odd noises I had
heard down the well.

'I took Weena's hand. Then, struck with a sudden idea, I left her
and turned to a machine from which projected a lever not unlike
those in a signal-box. Clambering upon the stand, and grasping this
lever in my hands, I put all my weight upon it sideways. Suddenly
Weena, deserted in the central aisle, began to whimper. I had judged
the strength of the lever pretty correctly, for it snapped after a
minute's strain, and I rejoined her with a mace in my hand more than
sufficient, I judged, for any Morlock skull I might encounter. And I
longed very much to kill a Morlock or so. Very inhuman, you may
think, to want to go killing one's own descendants! But it was
impossible, somehow, to feel any humanity in the things. Only my
disinclination to leave Weena, and a persuasion that if I began to
slake my thirst for murder my Time Machine might suffer, restrained
me from going straight down the gallery and killing the brutes I
heard.

'Well, mace in one hand and Weena in the other, I went out of that
gallery and into another and still larger one, which at the first
glance reminded me of a military chapel hung with tattered flags.
The brown and charred rags that hung from the sides of it, I
presently recognized as the decaying vestiges of books. They had
long since dropped to pieces, and every semblance of print had left
them. But here and there were warped boards and cracked metallic
clasps that told the tale well enough. Had I been a literary man I
might, perhaps, have moralized upon the futility of all ambition.
But as it was, the thing that struck me with keenest force was the
enormous waste of labour to which this sombre wilderness of rotting
paper testified. At the time I will confess that I thought chiefly
of the Philosophical Transactions and my own seventeen papers upon
physical optics.

'Then, going up a broad staircase, we came to what may once have
been a gallery of technical chemistry. And here I had not a little
hope of useful discoveries. Except at one end where the roof had
collapsed, this gallery was well preserved. I went eagerly to every
unbroken case. And at last, in one of the really air-tight cases,
I found a box of matches. Very eagerly I tried them. They were
perfectly good. They were not even damp. I turned to Weena. "Dance,"
I cried to her in her own tongue. For now I had a weapon indeed
against the horrible creatures we feared. And so, in that derelict
museum, upon the thick soft carpeting of dust, to Weena's huge
delight, I solemnly performed a kind of composite dance, whistling
The Land of the Leal as cheerfully as I could. In part it was a
modest cancan, in part a step dance, in part a skirt-dance (so far
as my tail-coat permitted), and in part original. For I am naturally
inventive, as you know.

'Now, I still think that for this box of matches to have escaped
the wear of time for immemorial years was a most strange, as for
me it was a most fortunate thing. Yet, oddly enough, I found a far
unlikelier substance, and that was camphor. I found it in a sealed
jar, that by chance, I suppose, had been really hermetically sealed.
I fancied at first that it was paraffin wax, and smashed the glass
accordingly. But the odour of camphor was unmistakable. In the
universal decay this volatile substance had chanced to survive,
perhaps through many thousands of centuries. It reminded me of a
sepia painting I had once seen done from the ink of a fossil
Belemnite that must have perished and become fossilized millions
of years ago. I was about to throw it away, but I remembered that
it was inflammable and burned with a good bright flame--was, in
fact, an excellent candle--and I put it in my pocket. I found no
explosives, however, nor any means of breaking down the bronze
doors. As yet my iron crowbar was the most helpful thing I had
chanced upon. Nevertheless I left that gallery greatly elated.

'I cannot tell you all the story of that long afternoon. It would
require a great effort of memory to recall my explorations in at all
the proper order. I remember a long gallery of rusting stands of
arms, and how I hesitated between my crowbar and a hatchet or a
sword. I could not carry both, however, and my bar of iron promised
best against the bronze gates. There were numbers of guns, pistols,
and rifles. The most were masses of rust, but many were of some
new metal, and still fairly sound. But any cartridges or powder
there may once have been had rotted into dust. One corner I saw was
charred and shattered; perhaps, I thought, by an explosion among the
specimens. In another place was a vast array of idols--Polynesian,
Mexican, Grecian, Phoenician, every country on earth I should think.
And here, yielding to an irresistible impulse, I wrote my name upon
the nose of a steatite monster from South America that particularly
took my fancy.

'As the evening drew on, my interest waned. I went through gallery
after gallery, dusty, silent, often ruinous, the exhibits sometimes
mere heaps of rust and lignite, sometimes fresher. In one place I
suddenly found myself near the model of a tin-mine, and then by the
merest accident I discovered, in an air-tight case, two dynamite
cartridges! I shouted "Eureka!" and smashed the case with joy. Then
came a doubt. I hesitated. Then, selecting a little side gallery,
I made my essay. I never felt such a disappointment as I did in
waiting five, ten, fifteen minutes for an explosion that never came.
Of course the things were dummies, as I might have guessed from
their presence. I really believe that had they not been so, I should
have rushed off incontinently and blown Sphinx, bronze doors, and
(as it proved) my chances of finding the Time Machine, all together
into non-existence.

'It was after that, I think, that we came to a little open court
within the palace. It was turfed, and had three fruit-trees. So we
rested and refreshed ourselves. Towards sunset I began to consider
our position. Night was creeping upon us, and my inaccessible
hiding-place had still to be found. But that troubled me very little
now. I had in my possession a thing that was, perhaps, the best of
all defences against the Morlocks--I had matches! I had the camphor
in my pocket, too, if a blaze were needed. It seemed to me that
the best thing we could do would be to pass the night in the open,
protected by a fire. In the morning there was the getting of the
Time Machine. Towards that, as yet, I had only my iron mace. But
now, with my growing knowledge, I felt very differently towards
those bronze doors. Up to this, I had refrained from forcing them,
largely because of the mystery on the other side. They had never
impressed me as being very strong, and I hoped to find my bar of
iron not altogether inadequate for the work.

IX

'We emerged from the palace while the sun was still in part above
the horizon. I was determined to reach the White Sphinx early the
next morning, and ere the dusk I purposed pushing through the woods
that had stopped me on the previous journey. My plan was to go as
far as possible that night, and then, building a fire, to sleep
in the protection of its glare. Accordingly, as we went along I
gathered any sticks or dried grass I saw, and presently had my arms
full of such litter. Thus loaded, our progress was slower than I had
anticipated, and besides Weena was tired. And I began to suffer from
sleepiness too; so that it was full night before we reached the
wood. Upon the shrubby hill of its edge Weena would have stopped,
fearing the darkness before us; but a singular sense of impending
calamity, that should indeed have served me as a warning, drove me
onward. I had been without sleep for a night and two days, and I was
feverish and irritable. I felt sleep coming upon me, and the
Morlocks with it.

'While we hesitated, among the black bushes behind us, and dim
against their blackness, I saw three crouching figures. There was
scrub and long grass all about us, and I did not feel safe from
their insidious approach. The forest, I calculated, was rather
less than a mile across. If we could get through it to the bare
hill-side, there, as it seemed to me, was an altogether safer
resting-place; I thought that with my matches and my camphor I could
contrive to keep my path illuminated through the woods. Yet it was
evident that if I was to flourish matches with my hands I should
have to abandon my firewood; so, rather reluctantly, I put it down.
And then it came into my head that I would amaze our friends behind
by lighting it. I was to discover the atrocious folly of this
proceeding, but it came to my mind as an ingenious move for covering
our retreat.

'I don't know if you have ever thought what a rare thing flame must
be in the absence of man and in a temperate climate. The sun's
heat is rarely strong enough to burn, even when it is focused by
dewdrops, as is sometimes the case in more tropical districts.
Lightning may blast and blacken, but it rarely gives rise to
widespread fire. Decaying vegetation may occasionally smoulder with
the heat of its fermentation, but this rarely results in flame. In
this decadence, too, the art of fire-making had been forgotten on
the earth. The red tongues that went licking up my heap of wood were
an altogether new and strange thing to Weena.

'She wanted to run to it and play with it. I believe she would have
cast herself into it had I not restrained her. But I caught her up,
and in spite of her struggles, plunged boldly before me into the
wood. For a little way the glare of my fire lit the path. Looking
back presently, I could see, through the crowded stems, that from my
heap of sticks the blaze had spread to some bushes adjacent, and a
curved line of fire was creeping up the grass of the hill. I laughed
at that, and turned again to the dark trees before me. It was very
black, and Weena clung to me convulsively, but there was still, as
my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, sufficient light for me to
avoid the stems. Overhead it was simply black, except where a gap of
remote blue sky shone down upon us here and there. I struck none of
my matches because I had no hand free. Upon my left arm I carried my
little one, in my right hand I had my iron bar.

'For some way I heard nothing but the crackling twigs under my feet,
the faint rustle of the breeze above, and my own breathing and the
throb of the blood-vessels in my ears. Then I seemed to know of a
pattering about me. I pushed on grimly. The pattering grew more
distinct, and then I caught the same queer sound and voices I had
heard in the Under-world. There were evidently several of the
Morlocks, and they were closing in upon me. Indeed, in another
minute I felt a tug at my coat, then something at my arm. And Weena
shivered violently, and became quite still.

'It was time for a match. But to get one I must put her down. I did
so, and, as I fumbled with my pocket, a struggle began in the
darkness about my knees, perfectly silent on her part and with the
same peculiar cooing sounds from the Morlocks. Soft little hands,
too, were creeping over my coat and back, touching even my neck.
Then the match scratched and fizzed. I held it flaring, and saw the
white backs of the Morlocks in flight amid the trees. I hastily took
a lump of camphor from my pocket, and prepared to light it as soon
as the match should wane. Then I looked at Weena. She was lying
clutching my feet and quite motionless, with her face to the ground.
With a sudden fright I stooped to her. She seemed scarcely to
breathe. I lit the block of camphor and flung it to the ground,
and as it split and flared up and drove back the Morlocks and the
shadows, I knelt down and lifted her. The wood behind seemed full of
the stir and murmur of a great company!

'She seemed to have fainted. I put her carefully upon my shoulder
and rose to push on, and then there came a horrible realization. In
manoeuvring with my matches and Weena, I had turned myself about
several times, and now I had not the faintest idea in what direction
lay my path. For all I knew, I might be facing back towards the
Palace of Green Porcelain. I found myself in a cold sweat. I had to
think rapidly what to do. I determined to build a fire and encamp
where we were. I put Weena, still motionless, down upon a turfy
bole, and very hastily, as my first lump of camphor waned, I began
collecting sticks and leaves. Here and there out of the darkness
round me the Morlocks' eyes shone like carbuncles.

'The camphor flickered and went out. I lit a match, and as I did so,
two white forms that had been approaching Weena dashed hastily away.
One was so blinded by the light that he came straight for me, and I
felt his bones grind under the blow of my fist. He gave a whoop of
dismay, staggered a little way, and fell down. I lit another piece
of camphor, and went on gathering my bonfire. Presently I noticed
how dry was some of the foliage above me, for since my arrival
on the Time Machine, a matter of a week, no rain had fallen. So,
instead of casting about among the trees for fallen twigs, I began
leaping up and dragging down branches. Very soon I had a choking
smoky fire of green wood and dry sticks, and could economize my
camphor. Then I turned to where Weena lay beside my iron mace. I
tried what I could to revive her, but she lay like one dead. I could
not even satisfy myself whether or not she breathed.

'Now, the smoke of the fire beat over towards me, and it must have
made me heavy of a sudden. Moreover, the vapour of camphor was in
the air. My fire would not need replenishing for an hour or so. I
felt very weary after my exertion, and sat down. The wood, too, was
full of a slumbrous murmur that I did not understand. I seemed just
to nod and open my eyes. But all was dark, and the Morlocks had
their hands upon me. Flinging off their clinging fingers I hastily
felt in my pocket for the match-box, and--it had gone! Then they
gripped and closed with me again. In a moment I knew what had
happened. I had slept, and my fire had gone out, and the bitterness
of death came over my soul. The forest seemed full of the smell of
burning wood. I was caught by the neck, by the hair, by the arms,
and pulled down. It was indescribably horrible in the darkness to
feel all these soft creatures heaped upon me. I felt as if I was in
a monstrous spider's web. I was overpowered, and went down. I felt
little teeth nipping at my neck. I rolled over, and as I did so my
hand came against my iron lever. It gave me strength. I struggled
up, shaking the human rats from me, and, holding the bar short,
I thrust where I judged their faces might be. I could feel the
succulent giving of flesh and bone under my blows, and for a moment
I was free.

'The strange exultation that so often seems to accompany hard
fighting came upon me. I knew that both I and Weena were lost, but I
determined to make the Morlocks pay for their meat. I stood with my
back to a tree, swinging the iron bar before me. The whole wood was
full of the stir and cries of them. A minute passed. Their voices
seemed to rise to a higher pitch of excitement, and their movements
grew faster. Yet none came within reach. I stood glaring at the
blackness. Then suddenly came hope. What if the Morlocks were
afraid? And close on the heels of that came a strange thing. The
darkness seemed to grow luminous. Very dimly I began to see the
Morlocks about me--three battered at my feet--and then I recognized,
with incredulous surprise, that the others were running, in an
incessant stream, as it seemed, from behind me, and away through the
wood in front. And their backs seemed no longer white, but reddish.
As I stood agape, I saw a little red spark go drifting across a gap
of starlight between the branches, and vanish. And at that I
understood the smell of burning wood, the slumbrous murmur that was
growing now into a gusty roar, the red glow, and the Morlocks'
flight.

'Stepping out from behind my tree and looking back, I saw, through
the black pillars of the nearer trees, the flames of the burning
forest. It was my first fire coming after me. With that I looked for
Weena, but she was gone. The hissing and crackling behind me, the
explosive thud as each fresh tree burst into flame, left little
time for reflection. My iron bar still gripped, I followed in the
Morlocks' path. It was a close race. Once the flames crept forward
so swiftly on my right as I ran that I was outflanked and had to
strike off to the left. But at last I emerged upon a small open
space, and as I did so, a Morlock came blundering towards me, and
past me, and went on straight into the fire!

'And now I was to see the most weird and horrible thing, I think, of
all that I beheld in that future age. This whole space was as bright
as day with the reflection of the fire. In the centre was a hillock
or tumulus, surmounted by a scorched hawthorn. Beyond this was
another arm of the burning forest, with yellow tongues already
writhing from it, completely encircling the space with a fence of
fire. Upon the hill-side were some thirty or forty Morlocks, dazzled
by the light and heat, and blundering hither and thither against
each other in their bewilderment. At first I did not realize their
blindness, and struck furiously at them with my bar, in a frenzy of
fear, as they approached me, killing one and crippling several more.
But when I had watched the gestures of one of them groping under the
hawthorn against the red sky, and heard their moans, I was assured
of their absolute helplessness and misery in the glare, and I struck
no more of them.

'Yet every now and then one would come straight towards me, setting
loose a quivering horror that made me quick to elude him. At one
time the flames died down somewhat, and I feared the foul creatures
would presently be able to see me. I was thinking of beginning the
fight by killing some of them before this should happen; but the
fire burst out again brightly, and I stayed my hand. I walked about
the hill among them and avoided them, looking for some trace of
Weena. But Weena was gone.

'At last I sat down on the summit of the hillock, and watched this
strange incredible company of blind things groping to and fro, and
making uncanny noises to each other, as the glare of the fire beat
on them. The coiling uprush of smoke streamed across the sky, and
through the rare tatters of that red canopy, remote as though they
belonged to another universe, shone the little stars. Two or three
Morlocks came blundering into me, and I drove them off with blows
of my fists, trembling as I did so.

'For the most part of that night I was persuaded it was a nightmare.
I bit myself and screamed in a passionate desire to awake. I beat
the ground with my hands, and got up and sat down again, and
wandered here and there, and again sat down. Then I would fall to
rubbing my eyes and calling upon God to let me awake. Thrice I saw
Morlocks put their heads down in a kind of agony and rush into the
flames. But, at last, above the subsiding red of the fire, above the
streaming masses of black smoke and the whitening and blackening
tree stumps, and the diminishing numbers of these dim creatures,
came the white light of the day.

'I searched again for traces of Weena, but there were none. It was
plain that they had left her poor little body in the forest. I
cannot describe how it relieved me to think that it had escaped the
awful fate to which it seemed destined. As I thought of that, I was
almost moved to begin a massacre of the helpless abominations about
me, but I contained myself. The hillock, as I have said, was a kind
of island in the forest. From its summit I could now make out
through a haze of smoke the Palace of Green Porcelain, and from that
I could get my bearings for the White Sphinx. And so, leaving the
remnant of these damned souls still going hither and thither and
moaning, as the day grew clearer, I tied some grass about my feet
and limped on across smoking ashes and among black stems, that still
pulsated internally with fire, towards the hiding-place of the Time
Machine. I walked slowly, for I was almost exhausted, as well as
lame, and I felt the intensest wretchedness for the horrible death
of little Weena. It seemed an overwhelming calamity. Now, in this
old familiar room, it is more like the sorrow of a dream than an
actual loss. But that morning it left me absolutely lonely
again--terribly alone. I began to think of this house of mine, of
this fireside, of some of you, and with such thoughts came a longing
that was pain.

'But as I walked over the smoking ashes under the bright morning
sky, I made a discovery. In my trouser pocket were still some loose
matches. The box must have leaked before it was lost.

X

'About eight or nine in the morning I came to the same seat of
yellow metal from which I had viewed the world upon the evening of
my arrival. I thought of my hasty conclusions upon that evening and
could not refrain from laughing bitterly at my confidence. Here
was the same beautiful scene, the same abundant foliage, the same
splendid palaces and magnificent ruins, the same silver river
running between its fertile banks. The gay robes of the beautiful
people moved hither and thither among the trees. Some were bathing
in exactly the place where I had saved Weena, and that suddenly gave
me a keen stab of pain. And like blots upon the landscape rose the
cupolas above the ways to the Under-world. I understood now what all
the beauty of the Over-world people covered. Very pleasant was their
day, as pleasant as the day of the cattle in the field. Like the
cattle, they knew of no enemies and provided against no needs. And
their end was the same.

'I grieved to think how brief the dream of the human intellect had
been. It had committed suicide. It had set itself steadfastly
towards comfort and ease, a balanced society with security and
permanency as its watchword, it had attained its hopes--to come
to this at last. Once, life and property must have reached almost
absolute safety. The rich had been assured of his wealth and
comfort, the toiler assured of his life and work. No doubt in that
perfect world there had been no unemployed problem, no social
question left unsolved. And a great quiet had followed.

'It is a law of nature we overlook, that intellectual versatility
is the compensation for change, danger, and trouble. An animal
perfectly in harmony with its environment is a perfect mechanism.
Nature never appeals to intelligence until habit and instinct are
useless. There is no intelligence where there is no change and no
need of change. Only those animals partake of intelligence that have
to meet a huge variety of needs and dangers.

'So, as I see it, the Upper-world man had drifted towards his
feeble prettiness, and the Under-world to mere mechanical industry.
But that perfect state had lacked one thing even for mechanical
perfection--absolute permanency. Apparently as time went on, the
feeding of the Under-world, however it was effected, had become
disjointed. Mother Necessity, who had been staved off for a
few thousand years, came back again, and she began below. The
Under-world being in contact with machinery, which, however perfect,
still needs some little thought outside habit, had probably retained
perforce rather more initiative, if less of every other human
character, than the Upper. And when other meat failed them, they
turned to what old habit had hitherto forbidden. So I say I saw it
in my last view of the world of Eight Hundred and Two Thousand Seven
Hundred and One. It may be as wrong an explanation as mortal wit
could invent. It is how the thing shaped itself to me, and as that I
give it to you.

'After the fatigues, excitements, and terrors of the past days, and
in spite of my grief, this seat and the tranquil view and the warm
sunlight were very pleasant. I was very tired and sleepy, and soon
my theorizing passed into dozing. Catching myself at that, I took my
own hint, and spreading myself out upon the turf I had a long and
refreshing sleep.

'I awoke a little before sunsetting. I now felt safe against being
caught napping by the Morlocks, and, stretching myself, I came on
down the hill towards the White Sphinx. I had my crowbar in one
hand, and the other hand played with the matches in my pocket.

'And now came a most unexpected thing. As I approached the pedestal
of the sphinx I found the bronze valves were open. They had slid
down into grooves.

'At that I stopped short before them, hesitating to enter.

'Within was a small apartment, and on a raised place in the corner
of this was the Time Machine. I had the small levers in my pocket.
So here, after all my elaborate preparations for the siege of the
White Sphinx, was a meek surrender. I threw my iron bar away, almost
sorry not to use it.

'A sudden thought came into my head as I stooped towards the portal.
For once, at least, I grasped the mental operations of the Morlocks.
Suppressing a strong inclination to laugh, I stepped through the
bronze frame and up to the Time Machine. I was surprised to find it
had been carefully oiled and cleaned. I have suspected since that
the Morlocks had even partially taken it to pieces while trying in
their dim way to grasp its purpose.

'Now as I stood and examined it, finding a pleasure in the mere
touch of the contrivance, the thing I had expected happened. The
bronze panels suddenly slid up and struck the frame with a clang.
I was in the dark--trapped. So the Morlocks thought. At that I
chuckled gleefully.

'I could already hear their murmuring laughter as they came towards
me. Very calmly I tried to strike the match. I had only to fix on
the levers and depart then like a ghost. But I had overlooked one
little thing. The matches were of that abominable kind that light
only on the box.

'You may imagine how all my calm vanished. The little brutes were
close upon me. One touched me. I made a sweeping blow in the dark at
them with the levers, and began to scramble into the saddle of the
machine. Then came one hand upon me and then another. Then I had
simply to fight against their persistent fingers for my levers, and
at the same time feel for the studs over which these fitted. One,
indeed, they almost got away from me. As it slipped from my hand,
I had to butt in the dark with my head--I could hear the Morlock's
skull ring--to recover it. It was a nearer thing than the fight in
the forest, I think, this last scramble.

'But at last the lever was fitted and pulled over. The clinging
hands slipped from me. The darkness presently fell from my eyes.
I found myself in the same grey light and tumult I have already
described.

XI

'I have already told you of the sickness and confusion that comes
with time travelling. And this time I was not seated properly in the
saddle, but sideways and in an unstable fashion. For an indefinite
time I clung to the machine as it swayed and vibrated, quite
unheeding how I went, and when I brought myself to look at the dials
again I was amazed to find where I had arrived. One dial records
days, and another thousands of days, another millions of days, and
another thousands of millions. Now, instead of reversing the levers,
I had pulled them over so as to go forward with them, and when I
came to look at these indicators I found that the thousands hand was
sweeping round as fast as the seconds hand of a watch--into
futurity.

'As I drove on, a peculiar change crept over the appearance of
things. The palpitating greyness grew darker; then--though I was
still travelling with prodigious velocity--the blinking succession
of day and night, which was usually indicative of a slower pace,
returned, and grew more and more marked. This puzzled me very much
at first. The alternations of night and day grew slower and slower,
and so did the passage of the sun across the sky, until they seemed
to stretch through centuries. At last a steady twilight brooded over
the earth, a twilight only broken now and then when a comet glared
across the darkling sky. The band of light that had indicated the
sun had long since disappeared; for the sun had ceased to set--it
simply rose and fell in the west, and grew ever broader and more
red. All trace of the moon had vanished. The circling of the stars,
growing slower and slower, had given place to creeping points of
light. At last, some time before I stopped, the sun, red and very
large, halted motionless upon the horizon, a vast dome glowing with
a dull heat, and now and then suffering a momentary extinction. At
one time it had for a little while glowed more brilliantly again,
but it speedily reverted to its sullen red heat. I perceived by this
slowing down of its rising and setting that the work of the tidal
drag was done. The earth had come to rest with one face to the sun,
even as in our own time the moon faces the earth. Very cautiously,
for I remembered my former headlong fall, I began to reverse
my motion. Slower and slower went the circling hands until the
thousands one seemed motionless and the daily one was no longer a
mere mist upon its scale. Still slower, until the dim outlines of a
desolate beach grew visible.

'I stopped very gently and sat upon the Time Machine, looking round.
The sky was no longer blue. North-eastward it was inky black,
and out of the blackness shone brightly and steadily the pale
white stars. Overhead it was a deep Indian red and starless, and
south-eastward it grew brighter to a glowing scarlet where, cut by
the horizon, lay the huge hull of the sun, red and motionless. The
rocks about me were of a harsh reddish colour, and all the trace of
life that I could see at first was the intensely green vegetation
that covered every projecting point on their south-eastern face. It
was the same rich green that one sees on forest moss or on the
lichen in caves: plants which like these grow in a perpetual
twilight.

'The machine was standing on a sloping beach. The sea stretched away
to the south-west, to rise into a sharp bright horizon against the
wan sky. There were no breakers and no waves, for not a breath of
wind was stirring. Only a slight oily swell rose and fell like a
gentle breathing, and showed that the eternal sea was still moving
and living. And along the margin where the water sometimes broke was
a thick incrustation of salt--pink under the lurid sky. There was a
sense of oppression in my head, and I noticed that I was breathing
very fast. The sensation reminded me of my only experience of
mountaineering, and from that I judged the air to be more rarefied
than it is now.

'Far away up the desolate slope I heard a harsh scream, and saw a
thing like a huge white butterfly go slanting and fluttering up into
the sky and, circling, disappear over some low hillocks beyond. The
sound of its voice was so dismal that I shivered and seated myself
more firmly upon the machine. Looking round me again, I saw that,
quite near, what I had taken to be a reddish mass of rock was moving
slowly towards me. Then I saw the thing was really a monstrous
crab-like creature. Can you imagine a crab as large as yonder table,
with its many legs moving slowly and uncertainly, its big claws
swaying, its long antennae, like carters' whips, waving and feeling,
and its stalked eyes gleaming at you on either side of its metallic
front? Its back was corrugated and ornamented with ungainly bosses,
and a greenish incrustation blotched it here and there. I could see
the many palps of its complicated mouth flickering and feeling as it
moved.

'As I stared at this sinister apparition crawling towards me, I felt
a tickling on my cheek as though a fly had lighted there. I tried to
brush it away with my hand, but in a moment it returned, and almost
immediately came another by my ear. I struck at this, and caught
something threadlike. It was drawn swiftly out of my hand. With a
frightful qualm, I turned, and I saw that I had grasped the antenna
of another monster crab that stood just behind me. Its evil eyes
were wriggling on their stalks, its mouth was all alive with
appetite, and its vast ungainly claws, smeared with an algal slime,
were descending upon me. In a moment my hand was on the lever, and
I had placed a month between myself and these monsters. But I was
still on the same beach, and I saw them distinctly now as soon as I
stopped. Dozens of them seemed to be crawling here and there, in the
sombre light, among the foliated sheets of intense green.

'I cannot convey the sense of abominable desolation that hung over
the world. The red eastern sky, the northward blackness, the salt
Dead Sea, the stony beach crawling with these foul, slow-stirring
monsters, the uniform poisonous-looking green of the lichenous
plants, the thin air that hurts one's lungs: all contributed to an
appalling effect. I moved on a hundred years, and there was the same
red sun--a little larger, a little duller--the same dying sea, the
same chill air, and the same crowd of earthy crustacea creeping in
and out among the green weed and the red rocks. And in the westward
sky, I saw a curved pale line like a vast new moon.

'So I travelled, stopping ever and again, in great strides of a
thousand years or more, drawn on by the mystery of the earth's fate,
watching with a strange fascination the sun grow larger and duller
in the westward sky, and the life of the old earth ebb away. At
last, more than thirty million years hence, the huge red-hot dome of
the sun had come to obscure nearly a tenth part of the darkling
heavens. Then I stopped once more, for the crawling multitude of
crabs had disappeared, and the red beach, save for its livid green
liverworts and lichens, seemed lifeless. And now it was flecked with
white. A bitter cold assailed me. Rare white flakes ever and again
came eddying down. To the north-eastward, the glare of snow lay
under the starlight of the sable sky and I could see an undulating
crest of hillocks pinkish white. There were fringes of ice along the
sea margin, with drifting masses further out; but the main expanse
of that salt ocean, all bloody under the eternal sunset, was still
unfrozen.

'I looked about me to see if any traces of animal life remained. A
certain indefinable apprehension still kept me in the saddle of the
machine. But I saw nothing moving, in earth or sky or sea. The green
slime on the rocks alone testified that life was not extinct. A
shallow sandbank had appeared in the sea and the water had receded
from the beach. I fancied I saw some black object flopping about
upon this bank, but it became motionless as I looked at it, and I
judged that my eye had been deceived, and that the black object was
merely a rock. The stars in the sky were intensely bright and seemed
to me to twinkle very little.

'Suddenly I noticed that the circular westward outline of the sun
had changed; that a concavity, a bay, had appeared in the curve. I
saw this grow larger. For a minute perhaps I stared aghast at this
blackness that was creeping over the day, and then I realized that
an eclipse was beginning. Either the moon or the planet Mercury was
passing across the sun's disk. Naturally, at first I took it to be
the moon, but there is much to incline me to believe that what I
really saw was the transit of an inner planet passing very near to
the earth.

'The darkness grew apace; a cold wind began to blow in freshening
gusts from the east, and the showering white flakes in the air
increased in number. From the edge of the sea came a ripple and
whisper. Beyond these lifeless sounds the world was silent. Silent?
It would be hard to convey the stillness of it. All the sounds of
man, the bleating of sheep, the cries of birds, the hum of insects,
the stir that makes the background of our lives--all that was over.
As the darkness thickened, the eddying flakes grew more abundant,
dancing before my eyes; and the cold of the air more intense. At
last, one by one, swiftly, one after the other, the white peaks of
the distant hills vanished into blackness. The breeze rose to a
moaning wind. I saw the black central shadow of the eclipse sweeping
towards me. In another moment the pale stars alone were visible. All
else was rayless obscurity. The sky was absolutely black.

'A horror of this great darkness came on me. The cold, that smote
to my marrow, and the pain I felt in breathing, overcame me. I
shivered, and a deadly nausea seized me. Then like a red-hot bow
in the sky appeared the edge of the sun. I got off the machine to
recover myself. I felt giddy and incapable of facing the return
journey. As I stood sick and confused I saw again the moving thing
upon the shoal--there was no mistake now that it was a moving
thing--against the red water of the sea. It was a round thing, the
size of a football perhaps, or, it may be, bigger, and tentacles
trailed down from it; it seemed black against the weltering
blood-red water, and it was hopping fitfully about. Then I felt I
was fainting. But a terrible dread of lying helpless in that remote
and awful twilight sustained me while I clambered upon the saddle.

XII

'So I came back. For a long time I must have been insensible upon
the machine. The blinking succession of the days and nights was
resumed, the sun got golden again, the sky blue. I breathed with
greater freedom. The fluctuating contours of the land ebbed and
flowed. The hands spun backward upon the dials. At last I saw again
the dim shadows of houses, the evidences of decadent humanity.
These, too, changed and passed, and others came. Presently, when the
million dial was at zero, I slackened speed. I began to recognize
our own pretty and familiar architecture, the thousands hand ran back
to the starting-point, the night and day flapped slower and slower.
Then the old walls of the laboratory came round me. Very gently,
now, I slowed the mechanism down.

'I saw one little thing that seemed odd to me. I think I have told
you that when I set out, before my velocity became very high, Mrs.
Watchett had walked across the room, travelling, as it seemed to me,
like a rocket. As I returned, I passed again across that minute when
she traversed the laboratory. But now her every motion appeared to
be the exact inversion of her previous ones. The door at the lower
end opened, and she glided quietly up the laboratory, back foremost,
and disappeared behind the door by which she had previously entered.
Just before that I seemed to see Hillyer for a moment; but he passed
like a flash.

'Then I stopped the machine, and saw about me again the old familiar
laboratory, my tools, my appliances just as I had left them. I got
off the thing very shakily, and sat down upon my bench. For several
minutes I trembled violently. Then I became calmer. Around me was
my old workshop again, exactly as it had been. I might have slept
there, and the whole thing have been a dream.

'And yet, not exactly! The thing had started from the south-east
corner of the laboratory. It had come to rest again in the
north-west, against the wall where you saw it. That gives you the
exact distance from my little lawn to the pedestal of the White
Sphinx, into which the Morlocks had carried my machine.

'For a time my brain went stagnant. Presently I got up and came
through the passage here, limping, because my heel was still
painful, and feeling sorely begrimed. I saw the Pall Mall Gazette
on the table by the door. I found the date was indeed to-day, and
looking at the timepiece, saw the hour was almost eight o'clock. I
heard your voices and the clatter of plates. I hesitated--I felt so
sick and weak. Then I sniffed good wholesome meat, and opened the
door on you. You know the rest. I washed, and dined, and now I am
telling you the story.

'I know,' he said, after a pause, 'that all this will be absolutely
incredible to you. To me the one incredible thing is that I am here
to-night in this old familiar room looking into your friendly faces
and telling you these strange adventures.'

He looked at the Medical Man. 'No. I cannot expect you to believe
it. Take it as a lie--or a prophecy. Say I dreamed it in the
workshop. Consider I have been speculating upon the destinies of our
race until I have hatched this fiction. Treat my assertion of its
truth as a mere stroke of art to enhance its interest. And taking
it as a story, what do you think of it?'

He took up his pipe, and began, in his old accustomed manner, to tap
with it nervously upon the bars of the grate. There was a momentary
stillness. Then chairs began to creak and shoes to scrape upon the
carpet. I took my eyes off the Time Traveller's face, and looked
round at his audience. They were in the dark, and little spots of
colour swam before them. The Medical Man seemed absorbed in the
contemplation of our host. The Editor was looking hard at the end
of his cigar--the sixth. The Journalist fumbled for his watch. The
others, as far as I remember, were motionless.

The Editor stood up with a sigh. 'What a pity it is you're not
a writer of stories!' he said, putting his hand on the Time
Traveller's shoulder.

'You don't believe it?'

'Well----'

'I thought not.'

The Time Traveller turned to us. 'Where are the matches?' he said.
He lit one and spoke over his pipe, puffing. 'To tell you the truth
... I hardly believe it myself.... And yet...'

His eye fell with a mute inquiry upon the withered white flowers
upon the little table. Then he turned over the hand holding his
pipe, and I saw he was looking at some half-healed scars on his
knuckles.

The Medical Man rose, came to the lamp, and examined the flowers.
'The gynaeceum's odd,' he said. The Psychologist leant forward to
see, holding out his hand for a specimen.

'I'm hanged if it isn't a quarter to one,' said the Journalist.
'How shall we get home?'

'Plenty of cabs at the station,' said the Psychologist.

'It's a curious thing,' said the Medical Man; 'but I certainly don't
know the natural order of these flowers. May I have them?'

The Time Traveller hesitated. Then suddenly: 'Certainly not.'

'Where did you really get them?' said the Medical Man.

The Time Traveller put his hand to his head. He spoke like one who
was trying to keep hold of an idea that eluded him. 'They were put
into my pocket by Weena, when I travelled into Time.' He stared
round the room. 'I'm damned if it isn't all going. This room and you
and the atmosphere of every day is too much for my memory. Did I
ever make a Time Machine, or a model of a Time Machine? Or is it all
only a dream? They say life is a dream, a precious poor dream at
times--but I can't stand another that won't fit. It's madness. And
where did the dream come from? ... I must look at that machine. If
there is one!'

He caught up the lamp swiftly, and carried it, flaring red, through
the door into the corridor. We followed him. There in the flickering
light of the lamp was the machine sure enough, squat, ugly, and
askew; a thing of brass, ebony, ivory, and translucent glimmering
quartz. Solid to the touch--for I put out my hand and felt the rail
of it--and with brown spots and smears upon the ivory, and bits of
grass and moss upon the lower parts, and one rail bent awry.

The Time Traveller put the lamp down on the bench, and ran his hand
along the damaged rail. 'It's all right now,' he said. 'The story I
told you was true. I'm sorry to have brought you out here in the
cold.' He took up the lamp, and, in an absolute silence, we
returned to the smoking-room.

He came into the hall with us and helped the Editor on with his
coat. The Medical Man looked into his face and, with a certain
hesitation, told him he was suffering from overwork, at which he
laughed hugely. I remember him standing in the open doorway, bawling
good night.

I shared a cab with the Editor. He thought the tale a 'gaudy lie.'
For my own part I was unable to come to a conclusion. The story was
so fantastic and incredible, the telling so credible and sober. I
lay awake most of the night thinking about it. I determined to go
next day and see the Time Traveller again. I was told he was in the
laboratory, and being on easy terms in the house, I went up to him.
The laboratory, however, was empty. I stared for a minute at the
Time Machine and put out my hand and touched the lever. At that the
squat substantial-looking mass swayed like a bough shaken by the
wind. Its instability startled me extremely, and I had a queer
reminiscence of the childish days when I used to be forbidden to
meddle. I came back through the corridor. The Time Traveller met me
in the smoking-room. He was coming from the house. He had a small
camera under one arm and a knapsack under the other. He laughed when
he saw me, and gave me an elbow to shake. 'I'm frightfully busy,'
said he, 'with that thing in there.'

'But is it not some hoax?' I said. 'Do you really travel through
time?'

'Really and truly I do.' And he looked frankly into my eyes. He
hesitated. His eye wandered about the room. 'I only want half an
hour,' he said. 'I know why you came, and it's awfully good of you.
There's some magazines here. If you'll stop to lunch I'll prove you
this time travelling up to the hilt, specimen and all. If you'll
forgive my leaving you now?'

I consented, hardly comprehending then the full import of his words,
and he nodded and went on down the corridor. I heard the door of
the laboratory slam, seated myself in a chair, and took up a daily
paper. What was he going to do before lunch-time? Then suddenly
I was reminded by an advertisement that I had promised to meet
Richardson, the publisher, at two. I looked at my watch, and saw
that I could barely save that engagement. I got up and went down the
passage to tell the Time Traveller.

As I took hold of the handle of the door I heard an exclamation,
oddly truncated at the end, and a click and a thud. A gust of air
whirled round me as I opened the door, and from within came the
sound of broken glass falling on the floor. The Time Traveller was
not there. I seemed to see a ghostly, indistinct figure sitting in
a whirling mass of black and brass for a moment--a figure so
transparent that the bench behind with its sheets of drawings was
absolutely distinct; but this phantasm vanished as I rubbed my eyes.
The Time Machine had gone. Save for a subsiding stir of dust, the
further end of the laboratory was empty. A pane of the skylight had,
apparently, just been blown in.

I felt an unreasonable amazement. I knew that something strange had
happened, and for the moment could not distinguish what the strange
thing might be. As I stood staring, the door into the garden opened,
and the man-servant appeared.

We looked at each other. Then ideas began to come. 'Has Mr. ----
gone out that way?' said I.

'No, sir. No one has come out this way. I was expecting to find him
here.'

At that I understood. At the risk of disappointing Richardson I
stayed on, waiting for the Time Traveller; waiting for the second,
perhaps still stranger story, and the specimens and photographs he
would bring with him. But I am beginning now to fear that I must
wait a lifetime. The Time Traveller vanished three years ago. And,
as everybody knows now, he has never returned.

EPILOGUE

One cannot choose but wonder. Will he ever return? It may be that he
swept back into the past, and fell among the blood-drinking, hairy
savages of the Age of Unpolished Stone; into the abysses of the
Cretaceous Sea; or among the grotesque saurians, the huge reptilian
brutes of the Jurassic times. He may even now--if I may use the
phrase--be wandering on some plesiosaurus-haunted Oolitic coral
reef, or beside the lonely saline lakes of the Triassic Age. Or did
he go forward, into one of the nearer ages, in which men are still
men, but with the riddles of our own time answered and its wearisome
problems solved? Into the manhood of the race: for I, for my own
part, cannot think that these latter days of weak experiment,
fragmentary theory, and mutual discord are indeed man's culminating
time! I say, for my own part. He, I know--for the question had been
discussed among us long before the Time Machine was made--thought
but cheerlessly of the Advancement of Mankind, and saw in the
growing pile of civilization only a foolish heaping that must
inevitably fall back upon and destroy its makers in the end. If that
is so, it remains for us to live as though it were not so. But to me
the future is still black and blank--is a vast ignorance, lit at a
few casual places by the memory of his story. And I have by me, for
my comfort, two strange white flowers--shrivelled now, and brown and
flat and brittle--to witness that even when mind and strength had
gone, gratitude and a mutual tenderness still lived on in the heart
of man.


William Gibson

Bruce Sterling


The Difference Engine



FIRST ITERATION

The Angel of Goliad

Composite image, optically encoded by escort-craft of the trans-Channel airship Lord Brunel aerial view of suburban Cherbourg, October 14, 1905.

A villa, a garden, a balcony.

Erase the balcony's wrought-iron curves, exposing a bath-chair and its occupant. Reflected sunset glints from the nickel-plate of the chair's wheel-spokes.

The occupant, owner of the villa, rests her arthritic hands upon fabric woven by a Jacquard loom.

These hands consist of tendons, tissue, jointed bone. Through quiet processes of time and information, threads within the human cells have woven themselves into a woman.

Her name is Sybil Gerard.

Below her, in a neglected formal garden, leafless vines lace wooden trellises on whitewashed, flaking walls. From the open windows of her sickroom, a warm draft stirs the loose white hair at her neck, bringing scents of coal-smoke, jasmine, opium.

Her attention is fixed upon the sky, upon a silhouette of vast and irresistible grace—metal, in her lifetime, having taught itself to fly. In advance of that magnificence, tiny unmanned aeroplanes dip and skirl against the red horizon.

Like starlings, Sybil thinks.

The airship's lights, square golden windows, hint at human warmth. Effortlessly, with the incomparable grace of organic function, she imagines a distant music there, the music of London the passengers promenade, they drink, they flirt, perhaps they dance.

Thoughts come unbidden, the mind weaving its perspectives, assembling meaning from emotion and memory.

She recalls her life in London. Recalls herself, so long ago, making her way along the Strand, pressing past the crush at Temple Bar. Pressing on, the city of Memory winding itself about her—till, by the walls of Newgate, the shadow of her father's hanging falls

And Memory turns, deflected swift as light, down another byway—one where it is always evening

It is January 15, 1855.

A room in Grand's Hotel, Piccadilly.


One chair was propped backward, wedged securely beneath the door's cut-glass knob. Another was draped with clothing a woman's fringed mantelet, a mud-crusted skirt of heavy worsted, a man's checked trousers and cutaway coat.

Two forms lay beneath the bedclothes of the laminated-maple four-poster, and off in the iron grip of winter Big Ben bellowed ten o'clock, great hoarse calliope sounds, the coal-fired breath of London.

Sybil slid her feet through icy linens to the warmth of the ceramic bottle in its wrap of flannel. Her toes brushed his shin. The touch seemed to start him from deep deliberation. That was how he was, this Dandy Mick Radley.

She'd met Mick Radley at Laurent's Dancing Academy, down Windmill Street. Now that she knew him, he seemed more the sort for Kellner's in Leicester Square, or even the Portland Rooms. He was always thinking, scheming, muttering over something in his head. Clever, clever. It worried her. And Mrs. Winterhalter wouldn't have approved, for the handling of political gentlemen required delicacy and discretion, qualities Mrs. Winterhalter believed she herself had a-plenty, while crediting none to her girls.

No more dollymopping, Sybil, Mick said. One of his pronouncements, something about which he'd made up his clever mind.

Sybil grinned up at him, her face half-hidden by the blanket's warm edge. She knew he liked the grin. Her wicked-girl grin. He can't mean that, she thought. Make a joke of it, she told herself. But if I weren't a wicked dollymop, would I be here with you now?

No more playing bobtail.

You know I only go with gentlemen.

Mick sniffed, amused. Call me a gentleman, then?

A very flash gentleman, Sybil said, flattering him. One of the fancy. You know I don't care for the Rad Lords. I spit on 'em, Mick.

Sybil shivered, but not unhappily, for she'd run into a good bit of luck here, full of steak-and-taters and hot chocolate, in bed between clean sheets in a fashionable hotel. A shiny new hotel with central steam-heat, though she'd gladly have traded the restless gurgling and banging of the scrolled gilt radiator for the glow of a well-banked health.

And he was a good-looking cove, this Mick Radley, she had to admit, dressed very flash, had the tin and was generous with it, and he'd yet to demand anything peculiar or beastly. She knew it wouldn't last, as Mick was a touring gent from Manchester, and gone soon enough. But there was profit in him, and maybe more when he left her, if she made him feel sorry about it, and generous.

Mick reclined into fat feather-pillows and slid his manicured fingers behind his spit-curled head. Silk nightshirt all frothy with lace down the front—only the best for Mick. Now he seemed to want to talk a bit. Men did, usually, after a while—about their wives, mostly.

But for Dandy Mick, it was always politics. So, you hate the Lordships, Sybil?

Why shouldn't I? Sybil said. I have my reasons.

I should say you do, Mick said slowly, and the look he gave her then, of cool superiority, sent a shiver through her.

What d'ye mean by that, Mick?

I know your reasons for hating the Government. I have your number.

Surprise seeped into her, then fear. She sat up in bed. There was a taste in her mouth like cold iron.

You keep your card in your bag, he said. I took that number to a rum magistrate I know. He ran it through a government Engine for me, and printed up your Bow Street file, rat-a-tat-tat, like fun. He smirked. So I know all about you, girl. Know who you are

She tried to put a bold face on it. And who's that, then, Mr. Radley?

No Sybil Jones, dearie. You're Sybil Gerard, the daughter of Walter Gerard, the Luddite agitator.

He'd raided her hidden past.

Machines, whirring somewhere, spinning out history.

Now Mick watched her face, smiling at what he saw there, and she recognized a look she'd seen before, at Laurent's, when first he'd spied her across the crowded floor. A hungry look.

Her voice shook. How long have you known about me?

Since our second night. You know I travel with the General. Like any important man, he has enemies. As his secretary and man-of-affairs, I take few chances with strangers. Mick put his cruel, deft little hand on her shoulder. You might have been someone's agent. It was business.

Sybil flinched away. Spying on a helpless girl, she said at last. You're a right bastard, you are!

But her foul words scarcely seemed to touch him—he was cold and hard, like a judge or a lordship. I may spy, girl, but I use the Government's machinery for my own sweet purposes. I'm no copper's nark, to look down my nose at a revolutionary like Walter Gerard—no matter what the Rad Lords may call him now. Your father was a hero.

He shifted on the pillow. My hero—that was Walter Gerard. I saw him speak, on the Rights of Labour, in Manchester. He was a marvel—we all cheered till our throats was raw! The good old Hell-Cats Mick's smooth voice had gone sharp and flat, in a Mancunian tang. Ever hear tell of the Hell-Cats, Sybil? In the old days?

A street-gang, Sybil said. Rough boys in Manchester.

Mick frowned. We was a brotherhood! A friendship youth-guild! Your father knew us well. He was our patron politician, you might say.

I'd prefer it if you didn't speak of my father, Mr. Radley.

Mick shook his head at her impatiently. When I heard they'd tried and hanged him—the words like ice behind her ribs—me and the lads, we took up torches and crowbars, and we ran hot and wild That was Ned Ludd's work, girl! Years ago He picked delicately at the front of his nightshirt.  'Tis not a tale I tell to many. The Government's Engines have long memories.

She understood it now—Mick's generosity and his sweet-talk, the strange hints he'd aimed at her, of secret plans and better fortune, marked cards and hidden aces. He was pulling her strings, making her his creature. The daughter of Walter Gerard was a fancy prize, for a man like Mick.

She pulled herself out of bed, stepping across icy floorboards in her pantalettes and chemise.

She dug quickly, silently, through the heap of her clothing. The fringed mantelet, the jacket, the great sagging cage of her crinoline skirt. The jingling white cuirass of her corset.

Get back in bed, Mick said lazily. Don't get your monkey up. 'Tis cold out there. He shook his head.  'Tis not like you think, Sybil.

She refused to look at him, struggling into her corset by the window, where frost-caked glass cut the upwashed glare of gaslight from the street. She cinched the corset's laces tight across her back with a quick practiced snap of her wrists.

Or if it is, Mick mused, watching her,  'tis only in small degree.

Across the street, the opera had let out—gentry in their cloaks and top-hats. Cab-horses, their backs in blankets, stamped and shivered on the black macadam. White traces of clean suburban snow still clung to the gleaming coachwork of some lordship's steam-gurney. Tarts were working the crowd. Poor wretched souls. Hard indeed to find a kind face amid those goffered shirts and diamond studs, on such a cold night. Sybil turned toward Mick, confused, angry, and very much afraid. Who did you tell about me?

Not a living soul, Mick said, not even my friend the General. And I won't be peaching on you. Nobody's ever said Mick Radley's indiscreet. So get back in bed.

I shan't, Sybil said, standing straight, her bare feet freezing on the floorboards. Sybil Jones may share your bed—but the daughter of Walter Gerard is a personage of substance!

Mick blinked at her, surprised. He thought it over, rubbing his narrow chin, then nodded.  'Tis my sad loss, then. Miss Gerard. He sat up in bed and pointed at the door, with a dramatic sweep of his arm. Put on your skirt, then, and your brass-heeled dolly-boots. Miss Gerard, and out the door with you and your substance. But 'twould be a great shame if you left. I've uses for a clever girl.

I should say you do, you blackguard, said Sybil, but she hesitated. He had another card to play—she could sense it in the set of his face.

He grinned at her, his eyes slitted. Have you ever been to Paris, Sybil?

Paris? Her breath clouded in midair.

Yes, he said, the gay and the glamorous, next destination for the General, when his London lecture tour is done. Dandy Mick plucked at his lace cuffs. What those uses are, that I mentioned, I shan't as yet say. But the General is a man of deep stratagem. And the Government of France have certain difficulties that require the help of experts  He leered triumphantly. But I can see that I bore you, eh?

Sybil shifted from foot to foot. You'll take me to Paris, Mick, she said slowly, and that's the true bill, no snicky humbugging?

Strictly square and level. If you don't believe me, I've a ticket in my coat for the Dover ferry.

Sybil walked to the brocade armchair in the corner, and tugged at Mick's greatcoat. She shivered uncontrollably, and slipped the greatcoat on. Fine dark wool, like being wrapped in warm money.

Try the right front pocket, Mick told her. The card-case. He was amused and confident—as if it were funny that she didn't trust him. Sybil thrust her chilled hands into both pockets. Deep, plush-lined

Her left hand gripped a lump of hard cold metal. She drew out a nasty little pepperbox derringer. Ivory handle, intricate gleam of steel hammers and brass cartridges, small as her hand but heavy.

Naughty, said Mick, frowning. Put it back, there's a girl.

Sybil put the thing away, gently but quickly, as if it were a live crab. In the other pocket she found his card-case, red morocco leather; inside were business cards, cartes-de-visite with his Engine-stippled portrait, a London train timetable.

And an engraved slip of stiff creamy parchment, first-class passage on the Newcomen, out of Dover.

You'll need two tickets, then, she hesitated, if you really mean to take me.

Mick nodded, conceding the point. And another for the train from Cherbourg, too. And nothing simpler. I can wire for tickets, downstairs at the lobby desk.

Sybil shivered again, and wrapped the coat closer. Mick laughed at her. Don't give me that vinegar phiz. You're still thinking like a dollymop; stop it. Start thinking flash, or you'll be of no use to me. You're Mick's gal now—a high-flyer.

She spoke slowly, reluctantly. I've never been with any man who knew I was Sybil Gerard. That was a lie, of course—there was Egremont, the man who had mined her. Charles Egremont had known very well who she was. But Egremont no longer mattered—he lived in a different world, now, with his po-faced respectable wife, and his respectable children, and his respectable seat in Parliament.

And Sybil hadn't been dollymopping, with Egremont. Not exactly, anyway. A matter of degree

She could tell that Mick was pleased at the lie she'd told him. It had flattered him.

Mick opened a gleaming cigar-case, extracted a cheroot, and lit it in the oily flare of a repeating match, filling the room with the candied smell of cherry tobacco.

So now you feel a bit shy with me, do you? he said at last. Well, I prefer it that way. What I know, that gives me a bit more grip on you, don't it, than mere tin.

His eyes narrowed. It's what a cove knows that counts, ain't it, Sybil? More than land or money, more than birth. Information. Very flash.

Sybil felt a moment of hatred for him, for his ease and confidence. Pure resentment, sharp and primal, but she crushed her feelings down. The hatred wavered, losing its purity, turning to shame. She did hate him—but only because he truly knew her. He knew how far Sybil Gerard had fallen, that she had been an educated girl, with airs and graces, as good as any gentry girl, once.

From the days of her father's fame, from her girlhood, Sybil could remember Mick Radley's like. She knew the kind of boy that he had been. Ragged angry factory-boys, penny-a-score, who would crowd her father after his torchlight speeches, and do whatever he commanded. Rip up railroad tracks, kick the boiler-plugs out of spinning jennies, lay policemen's helmets by his feet. She and her father had fled from town to town, often by night, living in cellars, attics, anonymous rooms-to-let, hiding from the Rad police and the daggers of other conspirators. And sometimes, when his own wild speeches had filled him with a burning elation, her father would embrace her and soberly promise her the world. She would live like gentry in a green and quiet England, when King Steam was wrecked. When Byron and his Industrial Radicals were utterly destroyed

But a hempen rope had choked her father into silence. The Radicals ruled on and on, moving from triumph to triumph, shuffling the world like a deck of cards. And now Mick Radley was up in the world, and Sybil Gerard was down.

She stood there silently, wrapped in Mick's coat. Paris. The promise tempted her, and when she let herself believe him, there was a thrill behind it like lightning. She forced herself to think about leaving her life in London. It was a bad, a low, a sordid life, she knew, but not entirely desperate. She still had things to lose. Her rented room in Whitechapel, and dear Toby, her cat. There was Mrs. Winterhalter, who arranged meetings between fast girls and political gentlemen. Mrs. Winterhalter was a bawd, but ladylike and steady, and her sort was difficult to find. And she would lose her two steady gentlemen, Mr. Chadwick and Mr. Kingsley, who each saw her twice a month. Steady tin, that was, and kept her from the street. But Chadwick had a jealous wife in Fulham, and, in a moment of foolishness, Sybil had stolen Kingsley's best cufflinks. She knew that he suspected.

And neither man was half so free with his money as Dandy Mick.

She forced herself to smile at him, as sweetly as she could. You're a rum'un, Mick Radley. You know you've got my leading-strings. Perhaps I was vexed with you at first, but I'm not so cakey as to not know a rum gentleman when I see one.

Mick blew smoke. You are a clever one, he said admiringly. You talk blarney like an angel. You're not fooling me, though, so you needn't deceive yourself. Still, you're just the gal I need. Get back in bed.

She did as he told her.

Jove, he said, your blessed feet are two lumps of ice. Why don't you wear little slippers, eh? He tugged at her corset, with determination. Slippers, and black silk stockings, he said. A gal looks very flash in bed, with black silk stockings.


From the far end of the glass-topped counter, one of Aaron's shopmen gave Sybil the cold eye, standing haughty and tall in his neat black coat and polished boots. He knew something was up—he could smell it. Sybil waited for Mick to pay, hands folded before her on her skirt, demure, but watching sidelong from beneath the blue fringe of her bonnet. Under her skirt, wadded through the frame of her crinoline, was the shawl she'd nicked while Radley tried on top-hats.

Sybil had learned how to nick things—she'd taught herself. It simply took nerve, that was the secret. It took pluck. Look neither right nor left—just grab, lift her skirt, stuff and rustle. Then stand quite straight, with a psalm-singing look, like a gentry girl.

The floorman had lost interest in her; he was watching a fat man fingering watered-silk braces. Sybil checked her skirt quickly. No bulge showed.

A young spotty-faced clerk, with inkstained thumbs, set Mick's number into a counter-top credit-machine. Zip, click, a pull on the ebony-handled lever, and it was done. He gave Mick his printed purchase-slip and did the parcel up in string and crisp green paper.

Aaron & Son would never miss a cashmere shawl. Perhaps their account-engines would, when they tallied up, but the loss couldn't hurt them; their shopping-palace was too big and too rich. All those Greek columns, chandeliers of Irish crystal, a million mirrors—room after gilded room, stuffed with rubber riding boots and French-milled soap, walking-sticks, umbrellas, cutlery, locked glass cases crammed with silver-plate and ivory brooches and lovely wind-up golden music-boxes And this was only one of a dozen in a chain. But for all of that, she knew, Aaron's wasn't truly smart, not a gentry place.

But couldn't you just do anything with money in England, if you were clever? Someday Mr. Aaron, a whiskery old merchant Jew from Whitechapel, would have a lordship, with a steam-gurney waiting at the curb and his own coat of arms on the coachwork. The Rad Parliament wouldn't care that Mr. Aaron was no Christian. They'd given Charles Darwin a lordship, and he said that Adam and Eve were monkeys.

The liftman, gotten up in a Frenchified livery, drew the rattling brass gate aside for her. Mick followed her in, his parcel tucked under his arm, and then they were descending.

They emerged from Aaron's into Whitechapel jostle. While Mick checked a street-map he took from his coat, she gazed up at the shifting letters that ran the length of Aaron's frontage. A mechanical frieze, a slow sort of kinotrope for Aaron's adverts, made all of little bits of painted wood, clicking about each in turn, behind leaded sheets of bevel-glass. CONVERT YOUR MANUAL PIANO, the jostling letters suggested, INTO A KASTNER'S PIANOLA.

The skyline west of Whitechapel was spikey with construction cranes, stark steel skeletons painted with red lead against the damp. Older buildings were furred with scaffolding; what wasn't being torn down, it seemed, to make way for the new, was being rebuilt in its image. There was a distant huffing of excavation, and a tremulous feeling below the pavement, of vast machines cutting some new underground line.

But now Mick turned left, without a word, and walked away, his hat cocked to one side, his checkered trouser-legs flashing under the long hem of his greatcoat. She had to hurry to match his step. A ragged boy with a numbered tin badge was sweeping mucky snow from the crossing; Mick tossed him a penny without breaking stride and headed down the lane called Butcher Row.

She caught up and took his arm, past red and white carcasses dangling from their black iron hooks, beef and mutton and veal, and thick men in their stained aprons crying their goods. London women crowded there in scores, wicker baskets on their arms. Servants, cooks, respectable wives with men at home. A red-faced squinting butcher lurched in front of Sybil with a double handful of blue meat. Hallo, pretty missus. Buy your gentleman my nice kidneys for pie! Sybil ducked her head and walked around him.

Parked barrows crowded the curb, where costers stood bellowing, their velveteen coats set off with buttons of brass or pearl. Each had his numbered badge, though fully half the numbers were slang, Mick claimed, as slang as the costers' weights and measures. There were blankets and baskets spread on neatly chalked squares on the paving, and Mick was telling her of ways the costers had to plump out shrunken fruit, and weave dead eels in with live. She smiled at the pleasure he seemed to take in knowing such things, while hawkers yelped about their brooms and soap and candles, and a scowling organ-grinder cranked, two-handed, at his symphony machine, filling the street with a fast springy racket of bells, piano-wire, and steel.

Mick stopped beside a wooden trestle-table, kept by a squint-eyed widow in bombazine, the stump of a clay pipe protruding from her thin lips. Arrayed before her were numerous vials of some viscous-looking substance Sybil took to be a patent medicine, for each was pasted with a blue slip of paper bearing the blurred image of a savage red Indian. And what would this be, mother? Mick inquired, tapping one red-waxed cork with a gloved finger.

Rock-oil, mister, she said, relinquishing the stem of her pipe, much as they call Barbados tar. Her drawling accent grated on the ear, but Sybil felt a pang of pity. How far the woman was from whatever outlandish place she'd once called home.

Really, Mick asked, it wouldn't be Texian?

 'Healthful balm,'  the widow said,  'from Nature's secret spring, the bloom of health and life to man will bring.' Skimmed by the savage Seneca from the waters of Pennsylvania's great Oil Creek, mister. Three pennies the vial and a guaranteed cure-all. The woman was peering up at Mick now with a queer expression, her pale eyes screwed tight in nests of wrinkles, as though she might recall his face. Sybil shivered.

Good day to you, then, mother, Mick said, with a smile that somehow reminded Sybil of a vice detective she'd known, a sandy little man who worked Leicester Square and Soho; the Badger, the girls had called him.

What is it? she asked, taking Mick's arm as he turned to go. What is it she's selling?

Rock-oil, Mick said, and she caught his sharp glance back at the hunched black figure. The General tells me it bubbles from the ground, in Texas 

Sybil was curious. Is it a proper cure-all, then?

Never mind, he said, and here's an end to chat. He was glancing bright-eyed down the lane. I see one, and you know what to do.

Sybil nodded, and began to pick her way through the market-crowd toward the man Mick had seen. He was a ballad-seller, lean and hollow-cheeked, his hair long and greasy under a tall hat wrapped in bright polka-dot fabric. He held both his arms bent, hands knotted as if in prayer, the sleeves of his rumpled jacket heavy with long rustling quires of sheet-music.

 'Railway to Heaven,' ladies and gents, the ballad-seller chanted, a veteran patterer.  'Of truth divine the rails are made, and on the Rock of Ages laid; the rails are fixed in chains of love, firm as the throne of God above.' Lovely tune and only tuppence, miss.

Do you have The Raven of San Jacinto'? Sybil asked.

I can get that, I can get it, the seller said. And what's that then?

About the great battle in Texas, the great General?

The ballad-seller arched his brows. His eyes were blue and crazily bright, with hunger, perhaps, or religion, or gin. One of your Crimea generals then, a Frenchy, this Mr. Jacinto?

No, no, Sybil said, and gave him a pitying smile, General Houston, Sam Houston of Texas. I do want that song, most particular.

I buy my publications fresh this afternoon, and I'll look for your song for you sure, miss.

I shall want at least five copies for my friends, Sybil said.

Ten pence will get you six.

Six, then, and this afternoon, at this very spot.

Just as you say, miss. The seller touched the brim of his hat.

Sybil walked away, into the crowd. She had done it. It was not so bad. She felt she could get used to it. Perhaps it was a good tune, too, one that people would enjoy when the balladman was forced to sell the copies.

Mick sidled up suddenly, at her elbow.

Not bad, Mick allowed, reaching into the pocket of his greatcoat, like magic, to produce an apple turnover, still hot, flaking sugar and wrapped in greasy paper.

Thank you, she said, startled but glad, for she'd been thinking of stopping, hiding, fetching out the stolen shawl, but Mick's eyes had been on her every moment. She hadn't seen him, but he'd been watching; that was the way he was. She wouldn't forget again.

They walked, together and apart, all down Somerset, and then through the vast market of Petticoat Lane, lit as evening drew on with a host of lights, a glow of gas-mantles, the white glare of carbide, filthy grease-lamps, tallow dips twinkling among the foodstuffs proffered from the stalls. The hubbub was deafening here, but she delighted Mick by gulling three more ballad-sellers.

In a great bright Whitechapel gin-palace, with glittering gold-papered walls flaring with fishtail gas-jets, Sybil excused herself and found a ladies' convenience. There, safe within a reeking stall, she fetched the shawl out. So soft it was, and such a lovely violet color too, one of the strange new dyes clever people made from coal. She folded the shawl neatly, and stuffed it through the top of her corset, so it rested safe. Then out to join her keeper again, finding him seated at a table. He'd bought her a noggin of honey gin. She sat beside him.

You did well, girl, he said, and slid the little glass toward her. The place was full of Crimean soldiers on furlough, Irishmen, with street-drabs hanging on them, growing red-nosed and screechy on gin. No barmaids here, but big bruiser bully-rock bartenders, in white aprons, with mill-knocker clubs behind the bar.

Gin's a whore's drink, Mick.

Everybody likes gin, he said. And you're no whore, Sybil.

Dollymop, bobtail. She looked at him sharply. What else d'ye call me, then?

You're with Dandy Mick now, he said. He leaned his chair back, jabbing his gloved thumbs through the arm-holes of his waistcoat. You're an adventuress.

Adventuress?

Bloody right. He straightened. And here's to you. He sipped his gin-twist, rolled it over his tongue with an unhappy look, and swallowed. Never mind, dear—they've cut this with turpentine or I'm a Jew. He stood up.

They left. She hung on his arm, trying to slow his pace.  'Adventurer,' that's what you are, then, eh, Mr. Mick Radley?

So I am, Sybil, he said softly, and you're to be my 'prentice. So you do as you're told in the proper humble spirit. Learn the tricks of craft. And someday you join the union, eh? The guild.

Like my father, eh? You want to make a play of that, Mick? Who he was, who I am?

No, Mick said flatly. He was old-fashioned, he's nobody now.

Sybil smirked. They let us wicked girls into this fancy guild of yours, do they, Mick?

It's a knowledge guild, he said soberly. The bosses, the big'uns, they can take all manner of things away from us. With their bloody laws and factories and courts and banks They can make the world to their pleasure, they can take away your home and kin and even the work you do  Mick shrugged angrily, his lean shoulders denting the heavy fabric of the greatcoat. And even rob a hero's daughter of her virtue, if I'm not too bold in speaking of it. He pressed her hand against his sleeve, a hard, trapping grip. But they can't ever take what you know, now can they, Sybil? They can't ever take that.


Sybil heard Hetty's footsteps in the hall outside her room, and the rattle of Hetty's key at the door. She let the serinette die down, with a high-pitched drone.

Hetty tugged the snow-flaked woollen bonnet from her head, shrugging free from her Navy cloak. She was another of Mrs. Winterhalter's girls, a big-boned, raucous brunette from Devon, who drank too much, but was sweet in her way, and always kind to Toby.

Sybil folded away the china-handled crank and lowered the cheap instrument's scratched lid. I was practicing. Mrs. Winterhalter wants me to sing next Thursday.

Bother the old drab, Hetty said. Thought this was your night out with Mr. C. Or is it Mr. K.? Hetty stamped warmth into her feet before the narrow little hearth, then noticed, in the lamplight, the scattering of shoes and hat-boxes from Aaron & Son. My word, she said, and smiled, her broad mouth pinched a bit with envy. New beau, is it? You're so lucky, Sybil Jones!

Perhaps. Sybil sipped hot lemon-cordial, tilling her head back to relax her throat.

Hetty winked. Winterhalter doesn't know about this one, eh?

Sybil shook her head and smiled. Hetty would not tell. D'ye know anything about Texas, Hetty?

A country in America, Hetty said readily. French own it, don't they?

That's Mexico. Would you like to go to a kinotrope show, Hetty? The former President of Texas is lecturing. I've tickets, free for the taking.

When?

Saturday.

I'm dancing then, Hetty said. Perhaps Mandy would go. She blew warmth into her fingers. Friend of mine comes by late tonight, wouldn't trouble you, would it?

No, Sybil said. Mrs. Winterhalter had a strict rule against any girl keeping company with men in her room. It was a rule Hetty often ignored, as if daring the landlord to peach on her. Since Mrs. Winterhalter chose to pay the rent directly to the landlord, Mr. Cairns, Sybil seldom had call to speak to him, and less with his sullen wife, a thick-ankled woman with a taste for dreadful hats. Cairns and his wife had never informed against Hetty, though Sybil was not sure why, for Hetty's room was next to theirs, and Hetty made a shameless racket when she brought men home—foreign diplomats, mostly, men with odd accents and, to judge by the noise, beastly habits.

You can carry on singing if you like, Hetty said, and knelt before the ash-covered fire. You've a fine voice. Mustn't let your gifts go to waste. She began to feed individual coals to the hearth, shivering. A dire chill seemed to enter the room then, through the cracked casement of one of the nailed-up windows, and for a strange passing moment Sybil felt a distinct presence in the air. A definite sense of observation, of eyes fixed upon her from another realm. She thought of her dead father. Learn the voice, Sybil. Learn to speak. It's all we have that can fight them, he had told her. This in the last few days before his arrest, when it was clear that the Rads had won again—clear to everyone, perhaps, save Walter Gerard. She had seen then, with heart-crushing clarity, the utter magnitude of her father's defeat. His ideals would be lost—not just misplaced but utterly expunged from history, to be crushed again and again and again, like the carcass of a mongrel dog under the racketing wheels of an express train. Learn to speak, Sybil. It's all we have

Read to me? Hetty asked. I'll make tea.

Very well. In her spotty, scattered life with Hetty, reading aloud was one of the little rituals they had that passed for domesticity. Sybil took up the day's Illustrated London News from the deal table, settled her crinoline about her in the creaking, damp-smelling armchair, and squinted at a front-page article. It concerned itself with dinosaurs.

The Rads were mad for these dinosaurs, it seemed. Here was an engraving of a party of seven, led by Lord Darwin, all peering intently at some indeterminate object embedded in a coal-face in Thuringia. Sybil read the caption aloud, showed the picture to Hetty. A bone. The thing in the coal was a monstrous bone, as long as a man was tall. She shuddered. Turning the page, she encountered an artist's view of the creature as it might have looked in life, a monstrosity with twin rows of angry triangular saw-teeth along its humped spine. It seemed the size of an elephant at least, though its evil little head was scarcely larger than a hound's.

Hetty poured the tea.  'Reptiles held sway across the whole of the earth,' eh? she quoted, and threaded her needle. I don't believe a bloody word of it.

Why not?

They're the bones of bloody giants, out of Genesis. That's what the clergy say, ain't it?

Sybil said nothing. Neither supposition struck her as the more fantastic. She turned to a second article, this one in praise of Her Majesty's Artillery in the Crimea. She found an engraving of two handsome subalterns admiring the operation of a long-range gun. The gun itself, its barrel stout as a foundry stack, looked fit to make short work of all Lord Darwin's dinosaurs. Sybil's attention, however, was held by an inset view of the gunnery Engine. The intricate nest of interlocking gearwork possessed a queer beauty, like some kind of baroquely fabulous wallpaper.

Have you anything that needs darning? Hetty asked.

No, thank you.

Read some adverts, then, Hetty advised. I do hate that war humbug.

There was HAVILAND CHINA, from Limoges, France; VIN MARIANI, the French tonic, with a testimonial from Alexandre Dumas and Descriptive Book, Portraits, and Autographs of Celebrities, upon application to the premises in Oxford Street; SILVER ELECTRO SILICON POLISH, it never scratches, never wears, it is unlike others; the NEW DEPARTURE BICYCLE BELL, it has a tone all its own; DR. BAYLEY'S LITHIA WATER, cures Bright's disease and the gouty diathesis; GURNEY'S REGENT POCKET STEAM-ENGINE, intended for use with domestic sewing machines. This last held Sybil's attention, but not through its promise to operate a machine at double the old speed at a cost of one halfpenny per hour.

Here was an engraving of the tastefully ornamented little boiler, to be heated by gas or paraffin. Charles Egremont had purchased one of these for his wife. It came equipped with a rubber tube intended to vent the waste steam when jammed under a convenient sash-window, but Sybil had been delighted to hear that it had turned Madame's drawing-room into a Turkish bath.

When the paper was finished, Sybil went to bed. She was woken around midnight by the savage rhythmic crouching of Hetty's bed-springs.


It was dim in the Garrick Theatre, dusty and cold, with the pit and the balcony and the racks of shabby seats; but it was pitch-dark below the stage, where Mick Radley was, and it smelled of damp and lime.

Mick's voice echoed up from under her feet. Ever seen the innards of a kinotrope, Sybil?

I saw one once, backstage, she said. At a music-hall, in Bethnal Green. I knew the fellow what worked it, a clacker cove.

A sweetheart? Mick asked. His echoing voice was sharp.

No, Sybil told him quickly, I was singing a bit But it scarcely paid.

She heard the sharp click of his repeating match. It caught on the third attempt and he lit a stub of candle. Come down, he commanded. Don't stand there like a goose, showing off your ankles. Sybil lifted her crinoline with both hands and picked her way uneasily down the steep damp stairs.

Mick reached up to grope behind a tall stage-mirror, a great gleaming sheet of silvered glass, with a wheeled pedestal and oily gears and worn wooden cranks. He retrieved a cheap black portmanteau of proofed canvas, placed it carefully on the floor before him, and squatted to undo the flimsy tin clasps. He removed a stack of perforated cards bound with a ribbon of red paper. There were other bundles in the bag as well, Sybil saw, and something else, a gleam of polished wood.

He handled the cards gently, like a Bible.

Safe as houses, he said. You just disguise 'em, you see—write something stupid on the wrapper, like 'Temperance Lecture—Parts One Two Three.' Then coves never think to steal 'em, or even load them up and look. Hefting the thick block, he riffled its edge with his thumb, so that it made a sharp crisp sound, like a gambler's new deck. I put a deal of capital in these, he said. Weeks of work from the best kino hands in Manchester. Exclusively to my design, I might point out. 'Tis a lovely thing, girl. Quite artistic, in its way. You'll soon see.

Closing the portmanteau, he stood. He carefully slid the bundle of cards into his coat-pocket, then bent over a crate and tugged out a thick glass tube. He blew dust from the tube, then gripped one end of it with a special pair of pincers. The glass cracked open with an airtight pop—there was a fresh block of lime in the tube. Mick slid it loose, humming to himself. He tamped the lime gently into the socket of a limelight burner, a great dish-shaped thing of sooty iron and gleaming tin. Then he turned a hose-tap, sniffed a bit, nodded, turned a second tap, and set the candle to it.

Sybil yelped as a vicious flash sheeted into her eyes. Mick chuckled at her over the hiss of blazing gas, dots of hot blue dazzle drifting before her. Better, he remarked. He aimed the blazing limelight carefully into the stage-mirror, then began to adjust its cranks.

Sybil looked around, blinking. It was dank and ratty and cramped under the Garrick stage, the sort of place a dog or a pauper might die in, with torn and yellowed bills underfoot, for naughty farces like That Rascal Jack and Scamps of London. A pair of ladies' unmentionables were wadded in a corner. From her brief unhappy days as a stage-singer, she had some idea how they might have gotten there.

She let her gaze follow steam-pipes and taut wires to the gleam of the Babbage Engine, a small one, a kinotrope model, no taller than Sybil herself. Unlike everything else in the Garrick, the Engine looked in very good repair, mounted on four mahogany blocks. The floor and ceiling above and beneath it had been carefully scoured and whitewashed. Steam-calculators were delicate things, temperamental, so she'd heard; better not to own one than not cherish it. In the stray glare from Mick's limelight, dozens of knobbed brass columns gleamed, set top and bottom into solid sockets bored through polished plates, with shining levers, ratchets, a thousand steel gears cut bright and fine. It smelled of linseed oil.

Looking at it, this close, this long, made Sybil feel quite odd. Hungry almost, or greedy in a queer way, the way she might feel about a fine lovely horse, say. She wanted—not to own it exactly, but possess it somehow

Mick took her elbow suddenly, from behind. She started. Lovely thing, isn't it?

Yes, it's lovely.

Mick still held her arm. Slowly, he put his other gloved hand against her cheek, inside her bonnet. Then he lifted her chin with his thumb, staring into her face. It makes you feel something, doesn't it?

His rapt voice frightened her, his eyes underlit with glare. Yes, Mick, she said obediently, quickly. I do feel it something.

He tugged her bonnet loose, to hang at her neck. You're not frightened of it, Sybil, are you? Not with Dandy Mick here, holding you. You feel a little special frisson. You'll learn to like that feeling. We'll make a clacker of you.

Can I do that, truly? Can a girl do that?

Mick laughed. Have you never heard of Lady Ada Byron, then? The Prime Minister's daughter, and the very Queen of Engines! He let her go, and swung both his arms wide, coat swinging open, a showman's gesture. Ada Byron, true friend and disciple of Babbage himself! Lord Charles Babbage, father of the Difference Engine and the Newton of our modern age!

She gaped at him. But Ada Byron is a ladyship!

You'd be surprised who our Lady Ada knows, Mick declared, plucking a block of cards from his pocket and peeling off its paper jacket. Oh, not to drink tea with, among the diamond squad at her garden-parties, but Ada's what you'd call fast, in her own mathematical way  He paused. That's not to say that Ada is the best, you know. I know clacking coves in the Steam Intellect Society that make even Lady Ada look a bit tardy. But Ada possesses genius. D'ye know what that means, Sybil? To possess genius?

What? Sybil said, hating the giddy surety in his voice.

D'ye know how analytical geometry was born? Fellow named Descartes, watching a fly on the ceiling. A million fellows before him had watched flies on the ceiling, but it took Ren6 Descartes to make a science of it. Now engineers use what he discovered every day, but if it weren't for him we'd still be blind to it.

What do flies matter to anyone? Sybil demanded.

Ada had an insight once that ranked with Descartes' discovery. No one has found a use for it as yet. It's what they call pure mathematics. Mick laughed.  'Pure.' You know what that means, Sybil? It means they can't get it to run. He rubbed his hands together, grinning. No one can get it to run.

Mick's glee was wearing at her nerves. I thought you hated lordships!

I do hate lordly privilege, what's not earned fair and square and level, he said. But Lady Ada lives and swears by the power of gray matter, and not her blue blood. He slotted the cards into a silvered tray by the side of the machine, then spun and caught her wrist. Your father's dead, girl! 'Tis not that I mean to hurt you, saying it, but the Luddites are dead as cold ashes. Oh, we marched and ranted, for the rights of labor and such—fine talk, girl! But Lord Charles Babbage made blueprints while we made pamphlets. And his blueprints built this world.

Mick shook his head. The Byron men, the Babbage men, the Industrial Radicals, they own Great Britain! They own us, girl—the very globe is at their feet, Europe, America, everywhere. The House of Lords is packed top to bottom with Rads. Queen Victoria won't stir a finger without a nod from the savants and capitalists. He pointed at her. And it's no use fighting that anymore, and you know why? 'Cause the Rads do play fair, or fair enough to manage—and you can become one of 'em, if you're clever! You can't get clever men to fight such a system, as it makes too much sense to 'em.

Mick thumbed his chest. But that don't mean that you and I are out in the cold and lonely. It only means we have to think faster, with our eyes peeled and our ears open  Mick struck a prize-fighter's pose elbows bent, fists poised, knuckles up before his face. Then he flung his hair back, and grinned at her.

That's all very well for you, Sybil protested. You can do as you like. You were one of my father's followers—well, there were many such, and some are in Parliament now. But fallen women get mined, d'ye see? Ruined, and stay that way.

Mick straightened, frowning at her. Now that's exactly what I mean. You're running with the flash mob, now, but thinking like a trollop! There's no one knows who you are, in Paris! The cops and bosses have your number here, true enough! But numbers are only that, and your file's no more than a simple stack of cards. For them as know, there's ways to change a number. He sneered, to see her surprise. It ain't done easy, here in London, I grant you. But affairs run differently, in the Paris of Louis Napoleon! Affairs run fast and loose in flash Paree, especially for an adventuress with a blarney tongue and a pretty ankle.

Sybil bit her knuckle. Her eyes burned suddenly. It was acrid smoke from the limelight, and fear. A new number in the Government's machines—that would mean a new life. A life without a past. The unexpected thought of such freedom terrified her. Not so much for what it meant in itself, though that was strange and dazzling enough. But for what Mick Radley might demand for such a thing, in fair exchange. Truly, you could change my number?

I can buy you a new one in Paris. Pass you off for French or an Argie or an American refugee girl. Mick folded his elegant arms. I promise nothing, mind you. You'll have to earn it.

You wouldn't gull me, Mick? she said slowly. Because because I could be really and specially sweet to a fellow who could do me such a great service.

Mick jammed his hands in his pockets, rocking back on his heels, looking at her. Could you now, he said softly. Her trembling words had fanned something inside him, she could see it in his eyes. An eager, lustful kindling, something she dimly knew was there, a need he had, to slip his fishhooks deeper into her.

I could, if you treated me fair and level, as your 'prentice adventuress, and not some cakey dollymop, to gull and cast aside. Sybil felt tears coming, harder this time. She blinked, and looked up boldly, and let them flow, thinking perhaps they might do some good. You wouldn't raise my hopes and dash them, would you? That would be low and cruel! If you did that I'd—I'd jump off Tower Bridge!

He looked her in the eye. Bar that sniffling, girl, and listen close to me. Understand this. You're not just Mick's pretty bit o' muslin—I may have a taste for that same as any man, but I can get that where I like, and don't need you just for that. I need the blarney skill and the daring pluck that was Mr. Walter Gerard's. You're to be my 'prentice, Sybil, and I your master, and let that be how things stand with us. You'll be loyal, obedient, truthful to me, no subterfuge and no impertinence, and in return, I'll teach you craft, and keep you well—and you'll find me as kind and generous as you are loyal and true. Do I make myself clear?

Yes, Mick.

We have a pact, then?

Yes, Mick. She smiled at him.

Well and good, he said. Then kneel, here, and put your hands together, so—he joined his hands in prayer—and make this oath. That you, Sybil Gerard, do swear by saints and angels, by powers, dominions, and thrones, by seraphim and cherubim and the all-seeing eye, to obey Michael Radley, and serve him faithfully, so help you God! Do you so swear?

She stared at him in dismay. Must I really?

Yes.

But isn't it a great sin, to make such an oath, to a man who I mean to say we're not in holy wedlock

That's a marriage vow, he said impatiently, and this a 'prentice oath!

She saw no alternative. Tugging her skirts back, she knelt before him on cold gritty stone.

Do you so swear?

I do, so help me God.

Don't look so glum, he said, helping her to her feet, that's a mild and womanly oath you swore, compared to some. He pulled her to her feet. Let it brace you, should you have doubts or disloyal thoughts. Now take this—he handed her the guttering candle—and hunt up that gin-soak of a stage-manager, and tell him I want the boilers fired.


They dined that evening in the Argyll Rooms, a Haymarket resort not far from Laurent's Dancing Academy. The Argyll had private supper-rooms in which the indiscreet might spend an entire night.

Sybil was mystified by the choice of a private room. Mick was certainly not ashamed to be seen with her in public. Midway through the lamb, however, the waiter admitted a stout little gentleman with pomaded red hair and a gold chain across a taut velvet waistcoat. He was round and plush as a child's doll.

Hullo, Corny,  Mick said, without bothering to put down his knife and fork.

Evening, Mick, the man said, with the curiously un-placeable accent of an actor, or a provincial long in service to city gently. I was told you'd need of me.

And told correctly. Corny. Mick neither offered to introduce Sybil nor asked the man to sit. She began to feel quite uncomfortable.  'Tis a brief part, so you should have little trouble remembering your lines. Mick produced a plain envelope from his coat and handed it to the man. Your lines, your cue, and your retainer. The Garrick, Saturday night.

The man smiled mirthlessly as he accepted the envelope. Quite some time since I played the Garrick, Mick. He winked at Sybil and took his leave with no more formality than that.

Who's that, Mick? Sybil asked. Mick had returned to his lamb and was spooning mint sauce from a pewter serving-pot.

An actor of parts, Mick said. He'll play opposite you in the Garrick, during Houston's speech.

Sybil was baffled. Play? Opposite me?

You're a 'prentice adventuress, don't forget. You can expect to be called on to play many roles, Sybil. A political speech can always benefit from a bit of sweetening.

Sweetening?

Never mind. He seemed to lose interest in his lamb, and pushed his plate aside. Plenty of time for rehearsal tomorrow. I've something to show you now. He rose from the table, crossed to the door, and bolted it securely. Returning, he lifted the proofed canvas portmanteau from the carpet beside his chair and placed it before her on the Argyll's clean but much mended linen.

She'd been curious about the portmanteau. Not curious that he'd carried it with him, from the Garrick's pit, first to the printers, to examine the handbills for Houston's lecture, then on to the Argyll Rooms, but because it was of such cheap stuff, nothing at all like the gear he so obviously prided himself on. Why should Dandy Mick choose to carry about a bag of that sort, when he could afford some flash confection from Aaron's, nickel clasps and silk woven in Ada checkers? And she knew that the black bag no longer contained the kino cards for the lecture, because he'd wrapped those carefully in sheets of The Times and hidden them again behind the stage-mirror.

Mick undid the wretched tin clasps, opened the bag, and lifted out a long narrow case of polished rosewood, its corners trimmed with bright brass. Sybil wondered if it mightn't contain a telescope, for she'd seen boxes of this sort in the window of a firm of Oxford Street instrument-makers. Mick handled it with a caution that was very nearly comical, like some Papist called upon to move the dust of a dead Pope. Caught up in a sudden mood of childlike anticipation, she forgot the man called Corny and Mick's worrying talk about playing opposite him at the Garrick. There was something of the magician about Mick now, as he placed the gleaming rosewood case on the tablecloth. She almost expected him to furl back his cuffs nothing here, you see, nothing here.

His thumbs swung tiny brass hooks from a pair of miniature eyelets. He paused for effect.

Sybil found that she was holding her breath. Had he brought a gift for her? Some token of her new status? Something to secretly mark her as his 'prentice adventuress?

Mick lifted the rosewood lid, with its sharp brass corners.

It was filled with playing cards. Stuffed end to end with them, a score of decks at the least. Sybil's heart fell.

You've seen nothing like this before, he said. I can assure you of that.

Mick pinched out the card nearest his right hand and displayed it for her. No, not a playing card, though near enough in size. It was made of some strange milky substance that was neither paper nor glass, very thin and glossy. Mick flexed it lightly between thumb and forefinger. It bent easily, but sprang rigid again as he released it.

It was perforated with perhaps three dozen tightly spaced rows of circular holes, holes no larger than those in a good pearl button. Three of its corners were slightly rounded, while the fourth was trimmed off at an angle. Near the trimmed corner, someone had written #I in faint mauve ink.

Camphorated cellulose, Mick declared, the devil's own stuff, should it touch fire, but naught else will serve the finer functions of the Napoleon.

Napoleon? Sybil was lost. Is it a sort of kino card, Mick?

He beamed at her, delighted. She seemed to have said the right thing.

Have you never heard of the Great Napoleon ordinateur, the mightiest Engine of the French Academy? The London police Engines are mere toys beside it.

Sybil pretended to study the contents of the box, knowing it would please Mick. But it was merely a wooden box, quite handsomely made, lined with the green baize that covered billiard tables. It contained a very large quantity of the slick milky cards, perhaps several hundred.

Tell me what this is about, Mick.

He laughed, quite happily it seemed, and bent suddenly to kiss her mouth.

In time, in time. He straightened, reinserted the card, lowered the lid, clicked the brass hooks into place. Every brotherhood has its mysteries. Dandy Mick's best guess is that nobody knows quite what it would mean to run this little stack. It would demonstrate a certain matter, prove a certain nested series of mathematical hypotheses All matters quite arcane. And, by the by, it would make the name of Michael Radley shine like the very heavens in the clacking confraternity. He winked. The French clackers have their own brotherhoods, you know. Les Fils de Vaucanson, they call themselves. The Jacquardine Society. We'll be showing those onion-eaters a thing or two.

He seemed drunk to her, now, though she knew he'd only had those two bottled ales. No, he was intoxicated by the idea of the cards in the box, whatever they might be.

This box and its contents are quite extraordinarily dear, Sybil. He seated himself again and rummaged in the cheap black bag. It yielded a folded sheet of stout brown paper, an ordinary pair of stationery-shears, a roll of strong green twine. As Mick spoke, he unfolded the paper and began to wrap the box in it. Very dear. Traveling with the General exposes a man to certain dangers. We're off to Paris after the lecture, but tomorrow morning you'll be taking this round to the Post Office in Great Portland Street. Done with wrapping, he wound twine about the paper. Nip this for me with the shears. She did as he asked. Now put your finger here. He executed a perfect knot. You'll be posting our parcel to Paris. Poste restante. Do you know what that means?

It means the parcel is held for the addressee.

Mick nodded, took a stick of scarlet sealing-wax from one trouser-pocket, his repeating match from the other. The match struck on the first try. Yes, held there in Paris for us, safe as houses. The wax darkened and slid in the oily flame. Scarlet droplets spattered the green knot, the brown paper. He tossed the shears and the roll of twine back into the portmanteau, pocketed the wax and the match, withdrew his reservoir-pen, and began to address the parcel.

But what is it, Mick? How can you know its value if you've no idea what it does?

Now I didn't say that, did I? I've my ideas, don't I? Dandy Mick always has his ideas. I'd enough of an idea to take the original up to Manchester with me, on the General's business. I'd enough of an idea to pump the canniest clackers for their latest compression techniques, and enough of the General's capital to commission the result on Napoleon-gauge cellulose!

It might have been Greek, for all it meant to her.


A knock came. An evil-looking servant boy, cropheaded and snuffling, wheeled in a trolley and cleared the plates. He made a botch of it, lingering as if expecting a gratuity, but Mick ignored him, and stared coolly into space, now and then grinning to himself like a cat.

The boy left with a sneer. At length there came the rap of a cane against the door. A second of Mick's friends had arrived.

This was a heavyset man of quite astonishing ugliness, pop-eyed and blue-jowled, his squat sloping forehead fringed in an oiled parody of the elegant spit-curls the Prime Minister favored. The stranger wore new and well-cut evening dress, with cloak, cane, and top-hat, a fancy pearl in his cravat and a gold Masonic ring on one finger. His face and neck were deeply sunburnt.

Mick rose at once from his chair, shook the ringed hand, offered a seat.

You keep late hours, Mr. Radley, the stranger said.

We do what we can to accommodate your special needs, Professor Rudwick.

The ugly gentleman settled in his chair with a sharp wooden squeak. His bulging eyes shot Sybil a speculative look then, and for one heart-leaping moment she feared the worst, that it had all been a gull and she was about to become part of some dreadful transaction between them.

But Rudwick looked away, to Mick. I won't conceal from you, sir, my eagerness to resume my activities in Texas. He pursed his lips. He had small, grayish, pebble-like teeth in a great slash of a mouth. This business of playing the London social lion is a deuced bore.

President Houston will grant you an audience tomorrow at two, if that's agreeable.

Rudwick grunted. Perfectly.

Mick nodded. The fame of your Texian discovery seems to grow by the day, sir. I understand that Lord Babbage himself has taken an interest.

We have worked together at the Institute at Cambridge, Rudwick admitted, unable to hide a smirk of satisfaction. The theory of pneumo-dynamics

As it happens, Mick remarked, I find myself in possession of a clacking sequence that may amuse His Lordship.

Rudwick seemed nettled by this news. Amuse him, sir? Lord Babbage is a most irascible man.

Lady Ada was kind enough to favor me in my initial efforts 

Favor you? said Rudwick, with a sudden ugly laugh. Is it some gambling-system, then? It had best be, if you hope to catch her eye.

Not at all, Mick said shortly.

Her Ladyship chooses odd friends, Rudwick opined, with a long sullen look at Mick. Do you know a man named Collins, a so-called oddsmaker?

Haven't had the pleasure, Mick said.

The fellow's on her like a louse in a bitch's ear, Rudwick said, his sunburnt face flushing. Fellow made me the most astounding proposition

And? Mick said delicately.

Rudwick frowned. I did fancy you might know him, he seems the sort that might well run in your circles 

No, sir.

Rudwick leaned forward. And what of another certain gent, Mr. Radley, very long of limb and cold of eye, who I fancy has been dogging my movements of late? Would he, perhaps, be an agent of your President Houston? Seemed to have a Texian air about him.

My President is fortunate in the quality of his agents.

Rudwick stood, his face dark. You'll be so kind, I'm sure, as to request the bastard to cease and desist.

Mick rose as well, smiling sweetly. I'll certainly convey your sentiments to my employer, Professor. But I fear I keep you from your night's amusements  He walked to the door, opened it, shut it on Rudwick's broad, well-tailored back.

Mick turned, winked at Sybil. He's off to the ratting-pits! A very low-sporting gentleman, our learned Professor Rudwick. Speaks his bloody mind, though, don't he? He paused. The General will like him.


Hours later, she woke in Grand's, in bed beside him, to the click of his match and the sweet reek of his cigar. He'd had her twice on the chaise behind their table in the Argyll Rooms, and once again in Grand's. She'd not known him to be so ardent before. She'd found it encouraging, though the third go had made her sore, down there.

The room was dark, save for the spill of gaslight past the curtains.

She moved a bit closer to him.

Where would you like to go, Sybil, after France?

She'd never considered the question. With you, Mick 

He chuckled, and slid his hand beneath the bedclothes, his fingers closing around the mound of her womanhood.

Where shall we go then, Mick?

Go with me and you'll go first to Mexico. Then north, for the liberation of Texas, with a Franco-Mexican army under the command of General Houston.

But but isn't Texas a frightfully queer place?

Quit thinking like a Whitechapel drab. All the world's queer, seen from Piccadilly. Sam Houston had himself a bloody palace, in Texas. Before the Texians threw him into exile, he was Britain's greatest ally in the American west. You and I, why, we could live like grandees in Texas, build a manor by some river 

Would they truly let us do that, Mick?

Her Majesty's Government, you mean? Perfidious Albion? Mick chuckled. Well, that largely depends on British public opinion toward General Houston! We're doing all we can to sweeten his reputation here in Britain. That's why he's on this lecture tour, isn't it?

I see, Sybil said. You're very clever, Mick.

Deep matters, Sybil! Balance of power. It worked for Britain in Europe for five hundred years, and it works even better in America. Union, Confederacy, Republics of Texas and California—they all take a turn in British favor, until they get too bold, a bit too independent, and then they're taken down a peg. Divide and rule, dear. The coal-end of Mick's cigar glowed in the darkness. If it weren't for British diplomacy, British power, America might be all one huge nation.

What about your friend the General? Will he truly help us?

That's the beauty of it! Mick declared. The diplomats thought Sam Houston was a bit stiff-necked, didn't care for some of his actions and policies, didn't back him as strongly as they should have. But the Texian junta that replaced him is far worse. They're openly hostile to British interests! Their days are numbered. The General has had to cool his heels a bit in exile here in England, but now he's on his way back to Texas, for what's his by right. He shrugged. Should have happened years ago. Our trouble is that Her Majesty's Government don't know their own mind! There's factions among 'em. Some don't trust Sam Houston—but the French will help us anyhow! Their Mexican clients have a border war with the Texians. They need the General!

You're going to war, then, Mick? She found it difficult to imagine Dandy Mick leading a cavalry charge.

Coup d'etat, more like, he assured her. We won't see much bloodshed. I'm Houston's political man, you see, and his man I'll stay, for I'm the one's arranged this London speaking-tour, and on to France, and I'm the one's made certain approaches as resulted in him being granted his audience with the French Emperor  But could that be true, really? And I'm the one as runs Manchester's newest and best through the kino for him, sweetens the press and British public opinion, hires the bill-stickers  He drew on his cigar, his fingers kneading her there, and she heard him puff out a great satisfied cloud of cherry smoke.

But he mustn't have felt like doing it again, not then, because she was soon asleep and dreaming, dreaming of Texas, a Texas of rolling downs, contented sheep, the windows of gray manors glinting in late-afternoon sunlight.


Sybil sat in an aisle seat, third row back in the Garrick, thinking unhappily that General Sam Houston, late of Texas, was not drawing much of a crowd. People were filtering in as the five-man orchestra squeaked and sawed and honked. A family party was settling in the row before her, two boys, in bluejackets and trousers, with laid-down shirt-collars, a little girl in a shawl and a braided frock, then two more little girls, ushered in by their governess, a thin-looking sort with a hooked nose and watery eyes, sniffling into her handkerchief. Then the oldest boy, sauntering in, a sneer on his face. Then papa with dress-coat and cane and whiskers, and fat mama with long ringlets and a big nasty hat and three gold rings on her plump soft fingers. Finally all were seated, amid a shuffling of coats and shawls and a munching of candied orange-peel, quite patently well-behaved and expecting improvement. Clean and soaped and prosperous, in their snug machine-made clothes.

A clerky fellow with spectacles took the next seat to Sybil's, an inch-wide blue strip showing at his hairline, where he'd shaved his forehead to suggest intellect. He was reading Mick's program and sucking an acidulated lemon-drop. And past him a trio of officers, on furlough from the Crimea, looking very pleased with themselves, come to hear about an old-fashioned war in Texas, fought the old-fashioned way. There were other soldiers speckled through the crowd, bright in their red coats, the respectable sort, who didn't go for drabs and gin, but would take the Queen's pay, and learn gunnery arithmetic, and come back to work in the railroads and shipyards, and better themselves.

The place was full of bettering-blokes, really shopkeepers and store-clerks and druggists, with their tidy wives and broods. In her father's day, such people, Whitechapel people, had been angry and lean and shabby, with sticks in their hands, and dirks in their belts. But times had changed under the Rads, and now even Whitechapel had its tight-laced scrubfaced women and its cakey clock-watching men, who read the 'Dictionary of Useful Knowledge' and the 'Journal of Moral Improvement', and looked to get ahead.

Then the gas-lights guttered in their copper rings, and the orchestra swung into a flat rendition of Come to the Bower. With a huff, the limelight flared, the curtain drew back before the kinotrope screen, the music covering the clicking of kino-bits spinning themselves into place. Broken frills and furbelows grew like black frost on the edges of the screen. They framed tall letters, in a fancy alphabet of sharp-edged Engine-Gothic, black against white



Editions

Panoptique

Presents


And below the kinotrope, Houston entered stage-left, a bulky, shabby figure, limping toward the podium at the center of the stage. He was drowned in dimness for the moment, below the raw and focused glare of Mick's limelight.

Sybil watched him closely, curious about him, wary—her first glimpse of Mick's employer. She'd seen enough American refugees in London to have ideas about them. The Unionists dressed much like normal Britons, if they had the money for it, while Confederates tended to dress rather gaudy and flash, but peculiar, not quite proper; to judge by Houston, the Texians were an even queerer and madder lot. He was a big man, red-faced and beefy, over six feet tall in his heavy boots, his broad shoulders draped in a long coarse-woven blanket rather like a mantelet, but barbarically striped. Red and black and umber, it swept the Garrick's stage like a tragedian's toga. He had a thick mahogany cane in his right hand, and he swung it lightly now, as if he didn't need it, but his legs shook, Sybil saw, and the gold fringe trembled on the fancy seams of his trousers.

Now he mounted to the darkened podium, wiped his nose, sipped at a glass of something that plainly wasn't water. Above his head the kinotrope shuffled into a colored image, the lion of Great Britain and a sort of long-horned bull. The animals fraternized beneath small crossed banners, the Union Jack and the single-starred flag of Texas, both bright in red and white and blue. Houston was adjusting something behind his podium; a small stage-mirror, Sybil guessed, so he could check the kinotrope behind him as he spoke, and not lose his place.

The kinotrope went to black and white again, the screen's bits flickering, row by row, like falling dominoes. A portrait-bust appeared in shaded jagged lines high balding forehead, heavy brows, thick nose bracketed by bristling cheek-whiskers that hid the ears. The thin mouth was set firmly, the cleft chin upraised. Then, below the bust, the words GENERAL SAM HOUSTON.

A second limelight flared, catching Houston at the podium, flinging him into sudden bright relief before the audience. Sybil clapped hard. She was the last to finish.

Thank you very kindly, ladies and gentlemen of London, Houston said. He had the deep booming voice of a practiced orator, marred by a foreign drawl. You do a stranger great honor. Houston looked across the seats of the Garrick. I see we have many gentlemen of Her Majesty's military in the audience tonight. He shrugged the blanket back a bit and limelight glittered harshly from the medals clinging to his coat. Your professional interest is very gratifying, sirs.

In the row before Sybil, the children were fidgeting. A little girl squealed in pain as one of her brothers punched her. And I see we have a future British fighter here, as well! There was a ripple of surprised laughter. Houston checked his mirror quickly, then leaned over his podium, his heavy brows knitting in grandfatherly charm. What's your name, son?

The wicked boy sat bolt upright. Billy, sir, he squeaked. Billy William Greenacre, sir.

Houston nodded gravely. Tell me, Master Greenacre, would you like to run away from home, and live with red Indians?

Oh, yes, sir, the boy blurted, and then Oh, no, sir! The audience laughed again.

When I was about your age, young William, I was a lad of spirit, like yourself. And that was the very course of action I pursued. The kino shuffled behind the General's head, and a colored map appeared, outlines of the various states of America, oddly shaped provinces with confusing names. Houston checked his mirror and spoke rapidly. I was born in the American state of Tennessee. My family was of the Scottish gentry, though times were hard for us, on our little frontier farm. And though I was born an American, I felt little allegiance to the Yankee government in far Washington. The kinotrope displayed the portrait of an American savage, a mad-eyed staring creature hung with feathers, cheeks streaked with kino-blocks of warpaint. Just across the river, Houston said, lived the mighty nation of the Cherokee, a simple folk of natural nobility. I found this suited me far better than a life with my American neighbors. Alas, for their souls were pinched by the greed for dollars.

Houston shook his head a bit before his British audience, pained at his own allusion to an American national failing. He had their sympathy, Sybil thought. The Cherokees won my heart, Houston continued, and I ran from home to join them, with nothing, ladies and gentlemen, but the buckskin coat on my back, and Homer's noble tale of the Iliad in my pocket. The kinotrope shuffled itself bottom-to-top, producing an image from a Grecian urn, a warrior with a crested helmet, his spear upraised. He bore a round shield with the emblem of a raven, wings outspread. There was a light pattering of impressed applause, which Houston accepted, nodding modestly, as if it were meant for him.

As a child of the American frontier, he said, I can't claim to have had much fine schooling, although in later life I passed the bar and led a nation. As a youth, however, I sought my education in an ancient school. I committed every line of the blind bard's book to memory. He lifted the medal-strewn lapel of his coat, left-handed. The heart within this scarred breast, he said, and thumped it, still stirs to that noblest of stories, with its tales of a valor to challenge the very gods, and of unstained martial honor that endures till death! He waited for applause. At length it came, though not as warmly as he seemed to expect.

I saw no contradiction in the lives of Homer's heroes and those of my beloved Cherokees, Houston persisted. Behind him, the Greek's javelin sprouted the dangling feathers of a hunting-spear, and war-paint daubed his face.

Houston peered at his notes. Together we hunted bear and deer and boar, fished the limpid stream and raised the yellow corn. Around the campfire, under open skies, I told my savage brothers of the moral lessons that my youthful heart had gleaned from Homer's words. Because of this, they gave me the red-man's name of Raven, after the feathered spirit that they deem the wisest of birds.

The Greek dissolved, giving way to a grander raven, its wings spread stiffly across the screen, its chest covered by a striped shield. Sybil recognized it. It was the American eagle, symbol of the sundered Union, but the white-headed Yankee bird had become Houston's black crow. It was clever, she decided, perhaps more clever than it was worth, for two of the kinotrope bits in the screen's upper-left-corner had jammed on their spindles, showing dots of left-over blue; a tiny fault but annoying all out of proportion, like a bit of dust in one's eye. Mick's fancy clacking was working the Garrick's kino very hard.

Distracted, Sybil had lost the thread of Houston's speech.  the brazen cry of the battle-trumpet, in the camp of the Tennessee volunteers. Another kino-portrait appeared a man who looked rather like Houston, but with a tall shock of hair in front, and hollow cheeks, identified by caption as GEN. ANDREW JACKSON.

There was a hiss of breath here and there, led by the soldiers perhaps, and the crowd stirred. Some Britons still remembered Hickory Jackson, without fondness. To hear Houston tell it, Jackson had also bravely fought against Indians, and even been President of America for a time; but all that meant little here. Houston praised Jackson as his patron and mentor, an honest soldier of the people, who valued a man's true inner worth above the tinsel of wealth or show, but the applause for this sentiment was grudging at best.

Now another scene appeared, some kind of rude frontier fort. Houston narrated a tale of siege, from his early military career, when he'd fought a campaign under Jackson against the Indians called Creek. But he seemed to have lost his natural audience, the soldiers, for the three Crimea veterans in Sybil's row were still muttering angrily about Hickory Jackson. The damned war was over before New Orleans 

Suddenly the limelight flashed blood-red. Mick was busy beneath the stage a tinted glass filter, the sudden booming of a kettle-drum, as little kino cannons cracked gunpowder-white around the fort, and single-bit flickers of red cannon-shell arched rapidly across the screen. Night after night we heard the Creek fanatics howling their eerie death-songs, Houston shouted, a pillar of glare beneath the screen. The situation demanded a direct assault, with cold steel! It was said to be certain death to charge that gate But I was not a Tennessee Volunteer for nothing 

A tiny figure dashed toward the fort, no more than a few black squares, a wriggling block of bits, and the entire stage went black. There was surprised applause in the sudden darkness. The penny-boys up in the Garrick's gallery whistled shrilly. Then limelight framed Houston again. He began to boast about his wounds; two bullets in the arm, a knife-stab in the leg, an arrow into his belly—Houston didn't say the vulgar word, but he did rub that area lingeringly, as if he were dyspeptic. He'd lain all night on the battlefield, he claimed, and then been hauled for days through wilderness, on a supply cart, bleeding, raving, sick with swamp-fever

The clerky cove next to Sybil took another lemon-drop, and looked at his pocket-watch. Now a five-pointed star appeared slowly amidst the funereal black of the screen, as Houston narrated his lingering escape from the grave. One of the jammed kino-bits had popped loose again, but another had jammed in the meantime, on the lower right. Sybil stifled a yawn.

The star brightened slowly as Houston spoke about his entry into American politics, presenting as his motive the desire to help his persecuted pet Cherokees. This was exotic enough, Sybil thought, but at its heart lay the same snicky humbugging politicians always talked, and the audience was growing restive. They would have liked more fighting, or perhaps more poetic talk about life with the Cherokees. Instead, Houston had settled into a litany of his election to some rude equivalent of Parliament, various obscure posts in provincial government, and all the while the star grew slowly, its edges branching elaborately, becoming the emblem of the government of Tennessee.

Sybil's eyelids grew heavy, fluttered, while the General blustered on.

Quite suddenly, Houston's tone changed, becoming lingering, sentimental, a honeyed lilt creeping into his drawl. He was talking about a woman.

Sybil sat up straighter, listening.

Houston had been elected Governor, it seemed, and had gotten himself some tin, and been cheery about it. And he'd found himself a sweetheart, some Tennessee gentry-girl, and married her.

But on the kino's screen, fingers of darkness crept in snake-like from the edges. They menaced the State Seal.

Governor and Mrs. Houston had scarcely settled in when wifey kicked over the traces, and fled back to her family. She'd left him a letter, Houston said, a letter that contained an awful secret. A secret he had never revealed, and had sworn to carry to his grave. A private matter, of which a gentleman of honor cannot and should not speak. Black disaster struck me  The newspapers—apparently they did have newspapers, in Tennessee—had attacked him. The tattling mouths of libel poured their venom on me, Houston lamented, as the Greek shield with the raven appeared, and black kino-blobs—mud, Sybil supposed—began to spatter it.

Houston's revelations grew shocking. He'd actually gone through with it, had divorced his wife, of all the unlikely, awful things. Of course he'd lost his position in Government; outraged society had bounded him from office, and Sybil wondered why Houston had dared to mention such an ugly scandal. It was as if he expected his London audience to morally approve of a divorced man. Still, she noticed, the ladies seemed intrigued, and not entirely without sympathy perhaps. Even the fat mama fluttered at her double-chins with a fan.

General Houston was a foreigner, after all, half a savage by his own account; but when he spoke of his wife it was tenderly, as of a true love, a love slain by some cruel mysterious truth. His bellowing voice broke with unashamed emotion; he mopped at his forehead a bit, with a fancy handkerchief from his leopard-skin vest.

In truth, he wasn't a bad-looking cove, over sixty but that sort could be kinder to a girl. His confession seemed bold and manly, for he himself had brought the matter up the divorce scandal and the secret letter from Mrs. Houston. He wouldn't stop talking about it, but neither would he tell them the secret; he'd pricked the curiosity of his audience—and Sybil herself was simply dying to know.

She chided herself, for being so cakey, for it was likely something stupid and simple, not half so deep and mysterious as he feigned. Likely his gentry-girl wasn't half so angelic as she'd looked. Likely she'd had her maiden virtue stolen from her by some good-looking Tennessee beau-trap, long before Raven Houston came along. Men had hard rules for their brides, if never for themselves.

Likely Houston had brought it all on himself. Perhaps he had beastly vile ideas about married life, come from living with savages. Or perhaps he'd milled his wife about with his fists—for Sybil fancied he'd be a right bully-rock, in his cups.

The kino came alive with harpies, meant to symbolize Houston's slanderers, those who'd smeared his precious honor with the ink of a gutter press. Nasty crooky-back things, crowding the screen in devilish black and red. As the screen whirred steadily, they twitched their cloven hooves. Never had she seen the like, some Manchester punch-card artist having gotten the gin-horrors sure Now Houston was ranting about challenges and honor, by which he meant dueling, Americans being most famous duelists, who loved guns and shot each other at the drop of a hat He'd have killed some of those newspaper rascals, Houston insisted loudly, if he hadn't been Governor, and on his dignity. So instead he'd thrown in his cards, and gone back to live with his precious Cherokees He had a real head of steam up, now; he'd stoked himself so, it was almost frightening to watch. The audience was entertained, their reserve broken by his bulging eyes and veiny Texian neck, but none too far from disgust.

Maybe it had been something really dreadful that he'd done, Sybil thought, rubbing her hands together inside her rabbit-skin muff. Maybe it was lady's-fever, that he'd given his own wife a case of the glue. Some types of glue were horrible, and could make you mad, or blind, or crippled. Maybe that was the secret. Mick might know. Very likely Mick knew all about it.

Houston explained that he had left the United States in disgust, and gone to Texas, and at the word a map appeared, a sprawl of land in the middle of the continent. Houston claimed he'd gone there seeking land for his poor suffering Cherokee Indians, but it was all a bit confusing.

Sybil asked the clerky fellow next to her for the time. Only an hour had passed. The speech was a third gone. Her moment was coming.

You must envision a nation many times the size of your home islands, said Houston, with no roads greater than the grassy tracks of Indians. Without, at that time, a single mile of British railroad, and lacking the telegraph, or, indeed, Engine resources of any kind. As commander-in-chief of the Texian national forces, my orders had no courier more swift or more reliable than the mounted scout, his way menaced by the Comanche and Karankawa, by Mexican raiding-parties, and by the thousand nameless hazards of the wilderness. Small wonder then that Colonel Travis should receive my orders too late; and place his confidence, tragically, in the reinforcing-party led by Colonel Fannin. Surrounded by an enemy force fifty times his own. Colonel Travis declared his objective to be Victory or Death—knowing full well that the latter was a surely fated outcome. The defenders of the Alamo perished to a man. The noble Travis, the fearless Colonel Bowie, and David Crockett, a very legend among frontiersmen—Messrs. Travis, Bowie, and Crockett each had a third of the kino screen, their faces gone strangely square with the cramped scale of their depletion—bought precious time for my Fabian strategy.

More soldier talk. Now he stepped back from the podium and pointed up at the kino with his heavy polished cane. The forces of Lopez de Santa Anna were arrayed as you see them here, with the woods upon his left flank and the San Jacinto river-marshes at his back. His siege engineers had dug in around the baggage-train, with emplacements of sharpened timber, represented thusly. By a forced march through Burnham's Ford, however, my army of six hundred had seized the wooded banks of Buffalo Bayou, unbeknown to enemy intelligence. The assault began with a brisk cannon-fire from the Texian center Now we can witness the movement of the Texian light-cavalry The shock of the foot-charge sent the enemy reeling in confusion, throwing his artillery, which was not yet limbered, into utter disarray. The kinotrope's blue squares and lozenges slowly chased the buckling red Mexican regiments through the checkered greens and whites of woods and swamps. Sybil shifted in her seat, trying to ease the chafing of her hoop-skirt. Houston's bloodthirsty boasting was finally reaching a climax.

The final count of the fallen numbered two Texian dead, six hundred and thirty of the invader. The massacres of Alamo and Goliad were avenged in Santanista blood! Two Mexican armies utterly defeated, with the capture of fourteen officers and twenty cannon.

Fourteen officers, twenty cannon—yes, that was her cue. Her moment had come. Avenge us. General Houston! Sybil shrieked, her throat constricted with stage-fright. She tried again, pulling herself to her feet, waving one arm, Avenge us, General Houston!

Houston halted, taken aback. Sybil shouted at him, shrilly. Avenge our honor, sir! Avenge Britain's honor! A babble of alarm rose—Sybil felt the eyes of the theatre crowd in upon her, shocked looks that people might give a lunatic. My brother, she shouted, but fear had seized her, bad nerves. She hadn't expected it to be so frightening. This was worse than singing on stage, far worse.

Houston lifted both his arms, the striped blanket spreading behind him like a cloak. Somehow he calmed the crowd by the gesture, asserted command. Above his head, the kinotrope wound slowly down, its flickering domino-tricks whirring to a stop, leaving San Jacinto frozen in mid-victory. Houston fixed Sybil with a look of mingled sternness and resignation. What is it, my dear young lady? What troubles you? Tell me.

Sybil gripped the back of the seat before her, closed her eyes tight, and sang it out. Sir, my brother is in a Texian prison! We are British, but the Texians imprisoned him, sir! They seized his farm, and his cattle! They even stole the very railroad that he worked on, a British railroad, built for Texas  Her voice was faltering, despite herself. Mick wouldn't like that, he would scold her performance The thought put a jolt of vitality into her. She opened her eyes. That regime, sir, the thieving Texian regime, they stole that British railroad! They robbed the workers in Texas, and the stockholders here in Britain, and paid us not a penny!

With the loss of the kinotrope's bright play of images, the theatre's atmosphere had changed. Everything was quite different suddenly, oddly intimate and strange. It was as if she and the General were somehow framed together, two figures on a silvered daguerreotype. A young London woman, in her bonnet and elegant shawl, reaches up with eloquent distress to the old foreign hero; both part-players now, with the surprised eyes of the public silently fixed on them.

You suffered because of the junta? Houston said.

Yes, sir! Sybil cried, a practiced quaver stealing into her voice. Don't frighten them, Mick had said, but make them pity you. Yes, the junta did it. They have flung my brother into their vile prison, for no crime, sir, but simply because my dear brother is a Houston man! He voted for you when you became President of Texas, sir! And he would vote for you today, although I fear very much they will kill him! What is your brother's name, my dear lady? Houston asked.

Jones, sir, Sybil quickly cried, Edwin Jones of Nacogdoches, who worked for Hedgecoxe's Railway Company.

I believe I know young Edward! Houston declared, his surprise evident in his tone. He clutched his cane angrily and his heavy brows knotted.

Listen to her, Sam! came a sudden deep voice. Sybil, alarmed, turned to look. It was the man from the Argyll Rooms—the fat actor, with his red hair and brushed velvet waistcoat. Those junta rascals appropriated the Hedgecoxe Railway! A pretty business, that, from a supposed British ally! Is this the gratitude they show, for years of British guidance and protection? He sat back down.

They're nothing but thieves and villains! Sybil shouted alertly. She groped quickly in memory, picking up the thread. General Houston! I'm a defenseless woman, but you're a man of destiny, a man of greatness! Can't there be justice for Texas, sir? Some redress for these affronts? Must my poor brother die there in misery, while cheats and tyrants steal our British property?

But Mick's fine rhetoric was drowned; there were shouts from the audience, here and there, over a muttered undertone of surprise and approval. Loud boyish hooting came from the penny-gallery.

A bit of London fun, all told. Perhaps, Sybil thought, she had made some of them believe her story, and pity her. Most simply howled and joked a bit, pleased to see some unexpected liveliness.

Sam Houston was always a true friend of Britain! Sybil shrieked, into the crowd's upturned faces. The words half-lost, useless, she raised the back of her wrist to her damp forehead. Mick had given her no more lines, so she let the strength seep from her legs and fell back, eyes fluttering, half-sinking into her seat.

Give Miss Jones air! Houston commanded, an excited bellow. The lady is overcome! Sybil watched through half-closed lids as blurred figures haltingly gathered round her. Dark evening-jackets, a rustle of crinoline, gardenia perfume, and a masculine smell of tobacco—a man seized her wrist, and felt for a pulse there with pinching fingers. A woman fanned Sybil's face, clucking to herself. Oh heaven, Sybil thought, shrinking, the fat mama from the row before her, with that intolerable oily look of a good woman doing her moral duty. A little thrill of shame and disgust shot through her. For a moment she felt genuinely weak, sinking with a buttery ease into the warmth of their concern, a half-dozen busybodies muttering around her in a shared pretense of competence, while Houston thundered on above them, hoarse with indignation.

Sybil allowed them to get her to her feet. Houston hesitated, seeing it, and there was a light gallant scatter of applause for her. She felt pale, unworthy; she smiled wanly, and shook her head, and wished she were invisible. She leaned her head on the padded shoulder of the man who had taken her pulse. Sir, if I could go, please, she whispered.

Her rescuer nodded alertly, a little fellow with clever blue eyes. His long greying hair was parted in the middle. I shall see the lady home, he piped at the others. He shrugged into an opera cape, perched a tall beaver hat on his head, and lent her his arm. They walked together up the aisle, Sybil leaning on him heavily, unwilling to meet anyone's eyes. The crowd was roused, now. For the first time, perhaps, they were listening to Houston as a man, rather than as some sort of queer American exhibit.

Her little gentleman held dingy velvet aside for her as they emerged into the Garrick's chilly foyer, with its flaking gilt cupids and damp-marked faux-marble walls.  'Tis very kind of you, sir, to help me so, Sybil offered, noting that her escort looked as though he might have money. Are you a medical man?

I was a student once, he said, with a shrug. His cheeks were flushed, twin hot points of red.

It gives a man a certain air of distinction, Sybil said, not for any particular purpose, but just to fill the silence. Schooling of that sort, I mean.

Hardly, madame. I wasted all my time versifying. I must say that you seem fit enough now. Very sorry to hear about that unfortunate brother of yours.

Thank you, sir. Sybil looked at him sidelong. I'm afraid it was very forward of me, but General Houston's eloquence earned me away.

He shot her an opaque glance, the look of a man who suspects that a woman is gulling him. In all honesty, he said, I do not entirely share your enthusiasm. He coughed explosively into a wadded handkerchief and wiped his mouth. This London air will be the death of me.

Nonetheless, I do thank you, sir, though I regret we've not been introduced 

Keats, he said, Mr. Keats. He drew a ticking silver chronometer from his waistcoat, a many-dialed thing the size of a small potato, and consulted it. I'm not familiar with the district, he said distantly. I'd thought to hail you a cabriolet, but at this hour

Oh, no, Mr. Keats, thank you, but I shall go by the underground.

His bright eyes widened. No respectable woman rode the underground unescorted.

But you haven't told me your profession, Mr. Keats, she said, hoping to distract him.

Kinotropy, Keats said. The techniques employed here tonight are of some special interest! While the screen's resolution is quite modest, and the refresh-rate positively slow, remarkable effects have been secured, one presumes through algorithmic compression—but I fear that is all a bit technical. He put away his chronometer. Are you entirely certain you wouldn't rather I attempted to hail a cab? Do you know London well, Miss Jones? I might escort you to the local omnibus stand—'tis a railless carriage, you see 

No, sir, thank you. You've been exceptionally kind.

You're quite welcome, he said, his relief evident as he opened and held one of the half-glass doors to the street. Just then a skinny boy sidled rapidly up behind them, brushed past, and out of the theatre without a word. He was draped in a long dirty coat of canvas, something a fisherman might wear. A singular thing to wear to a lecture, Sybil thought, though one saw queerer garments on the poor; the sleeves flapped emptily, as though the boy were hugging himself, against a chill perhaps. His gait was odd, bent-backed, as if he were drunk or ill.

I say there! Young man! Mr. Keats had produced a coin, and Sybil understood that he wished the boy to hail a cab for her, but now the wet eyes gleamed at them with alarm, the pale face hollowed by gaslight. Suddenly he bolted, something dark tumbling from beneath his coat, where it rolled into the gutter. The boy halted and looked warily back at them.

He'd dropped a hat, a top-hat.

He came trotting back, eyes still on them, snatched it up, stuffed it under his coat, and off again, into the shadows, though this time not nearly so rapidly.

 'Pon my word, Mr. Keats said in disgust, that fellow's a thief! That water-proof is stuffed with the hats of the audience!

Sybil could think of nothing to say.

I imagine the rascal took cruel advantage of that commotion you caused, Keats told her, his tone lightly etched with suspicion. Pity! One never knows who to trust these days.

Sir, I do believe I hear the Engine getting up steam for the kinotrope 

And that was enough for him.


The installation of exhaust-fans, said the Daily Telegraph, had wrought a perceptible improvement in the atmosphere of the Metropolitan, though Lord Babbage himself held that a truly modern underground railway would operate on pneumatic principles exclusively, involving no combustion whatever, rather in the way mail was conveyed throughout Paris.

Seated in a second-class carnage, breathing as shallowly as possible, Sybil knew it all for humbug, or in any case the improvement part, for who knew what marvels the Rads mightn't bring forth? But hadn't the Rad papers also published the testimony of medicals, in the pay of the railroad, that sulphurous fumes were therapeutic for asthma? And it wasn't only the fumes from the Engines, but vile sewer-seepings as well, and gassy leakings from collapsible India-rubber bags, that lit the carriage-jets in their wire-netted glass shades.

It was a queer business, the underground, when you thought about it, racketing along at such speeds, through the darkness under London, where the navvies had come upon lead water-pipes of the Romans, and coins, mosaics, and archways, elephant's teeth a thousand years old

And the digging went on, this and every night, for she'd heard their great machine huffing, as she'd stood by Mick on the Whitechapel pavement; they worked unceasingly, the excavators, boring newer, deeper lines now, down below the tangle of sewers and gas-pipes and bricked-over rivers. The new lines were shored with steel, and soon Lord Babbage's smokeless trains would slide through them silent as eels, though she found the thought of it somehow unclean.

The lamps flared all at once, the flow of gas disturbed by a particularly sharp jolt, the faces of the other passengers seeming to leap out at her the sallow gent with something of the successful publican about him, the round-cheeked old Quaker cleric, the drunken dandy with his coat open, his canary waistcoat all dotted down the front with claret

There were no other women in the carriage.

Farewell to you, sirs, she imagined herself crying, farewell to your London, for she was a 'prentice adventuress now, sworn and true, bound for Paris, though the first leg of the voyage consisted necessarily of the tuppenny trip back to Whitechapel

But the clergyman had noticed her, his contempt quite open, there for anyone to see.


It was really quite horribly cold, making her way from the station to her room in Flower-and-Dean Street; she regretted her vanity, for having chosen her fine new shawl rather than her mantelet. Her teeth were chattering. Sharp frost shone in pools of gas-light on the street's new macadam.

The cobbles of London were vanishing month by month, paved over with black stuff that poured stinking hot from the maws of great wagons, for navvies to spread and smooth with rakes, before the advance of the steam-roller.

A daring fellow whisked past her, taking full advantage of the gritty new surface. Nearly recumbent within the creaking frame of a four-wheeled velocipede, his shoes were strapped to whirling cranks and his breath puffed explosively into the cold. He was bare-headed and goggled, in a thick striped jersey, a long knit scarf flapping out behind him as he sped away. Sybil supposed him an inventor.

London was rife with inventors, the poorer and madder of them congregating in the public squares to display their blueprints and models, and harangue the strolling crowds. In a week's time she'd encountered a wicked-looking device meant to crimp hair by electricity, a child's mechanical top that played Beethoven, and a scheme for electro-plating the dead.

Leaving the thoroughfare for the unimproved cobbles of Renton Passage, she made out the sign of the Hart and heard the jangle of a pianola. It was Mrs. Winterhalter who'd arranged for her to room above the Hart. The public house itself was a steady sort of place, admitting no women. It catered to junior clerks and shopmen, and offered as its raciest pleasure a pull at a coin-fed wagering-machine.

The rooms above were reached by way of steep dark stairs, that climbed below a sooty skylight to an alcove presenting a pair of identical doors. Mr. Cairns, the landlord, had rooms behind the door on the left.

Sybil climbed the stairs, fumbled a penny box of lucifers from her muff, and struck one. Cairns had chained a bicycle to the iron railing overlooking the stairwell; the bright brass padlock gleamed in the flare of the match. She shook the lucifer out, hoping that Hetty hadn't double-latched the door Hetty hadn't, and Sybil's key turned smoothly in the lock.

Toby was there to greet her, padding silently across the bare boards to twine himself around and about her ankles, purring like sixty.

Hetty had left an oil-lamp turned down low on the deal table that stood in the hallway; it was smoking now, the wick in need of trimming. A foolish thing to have left it burning, where Toby might've sent it crashing, but Sybil felt grateful not to have found the place in darkness. She took Toby up in her arms. He smelled of herring. Has Hetty fed you, then, dear? He yowled softly, and batted at the ribbons of her bonnet.

The pattern of the wallpaper danced as she lifted the lamp. The hallway had seen no sunlight in all the years the Hart had stood, yet the printed flowers were gone a shade like dust.

Sybil's room had two windows, though they opened on a blank wall of grimed yellow brick, so near she could've touched it, if someone hadn't driven nails into the casements. Still, on a bright day, with the sun directly overhead, a bit of light did filter in. And Hetty's room, though larger, had only one window. If Hetty was here, now, she must be alone and asleep, as no light was visible from the crack at the bottom of her closed door.

It was good to have one's own room, one's privacy, however modest. Sybil put Toby down, though he protested, and carried the lamp to her own door, which stood slightly ajar. Inside, all was as she'd left it, though she saw that Hetty had left the latest number of the Illustrated London News on her pillow, with an engraving from Crimea on the front, a scene of a city all aflame. She set the lamp down on the cracked marble lid of the commode, Toby prowling about her ankles as though he expected to discover more herring, and considered what she should do.

The ticking of the fat tin alarm-clock, which she sometimes found unbearable, was reassuring now; at least it was running, and she imagined that the time it showed, quarter past eleven, was correct. She gave the winder a few turns, just for luck. Mick would come for her at midnight, and there were decisions to be made, as he'd advised her to travel very light.

She took a wick-trimmer from the commode's drawer, raised the lamp's chimney, and scissored away the blackened bit. The light somewhat improved. She threw on her mantelet against the cold, opened the lid of a japanned tin chest, and began to make an inventory of her better things. But after setting aside two changes of undergarments, it came to her that the less she took, the more Dandy Mick would have to buy for her in Paris. And if that wasn't thinking like a 'prentice adventuress, she didn't know what was.

Still, she did have some things she was 'specially fond of, and these went, along with the undergarments, into her brocade portmanteau with the split seam she'd meant to mend. There was a lovely bottle of rose-scented Portland water, half-full, a green paste brooch from Mr. Kingsley, a set of hairbrushes with imitation ebony backs, a miniature flower-press with a souvenir view of Kensington Palace, and a patent German curling-iron she'd nicked from a hair-dresser's. She added a bone-handled tooth-brush and a tin of camphorated dentifrice.

Now she took a tiny silver propelling-pencil and settled herself on the edge of her bed to write a note to Hetty. The pencil was a gift from Mr. Chadwick, with THE METROPOLITAN RAILWAY CORPORATION engraved along its shaft; the plate was starting to flake away from the brass beneath. For paper, she found she had only the back of a handbill advertising instantaneous chocolate.

'My dear Harriet', she began, 'I am Off to Paris', but then she paused, removed the pencil's cap, and used the rubber to erase those last three words, substituting 'run Away with a Gentleman. Do not be alarmed. I am Well. You are welcome to any Cloathes I leave behind, and please do take Care of dear Toby and give him Herring. Yrs. sincerely, Sybil.'

It made her feel queer, to write it, and when she looked down at Toby she felt sad, and false, to leave him.

With this thought came thoughts of Radley. She was struck by a sudden and utter conviction of his falsehood.

He will come, she whispered fiercely. She put the lamp and the folded note on the narrow mantel.

On the mantel lay a flat tin, brightly lithographed with the name of a Strand tobacconist. She knew that it contained Turkish cigarettes. One of Hetty's younger gentlemen, a medical student, had once urged her to take up the habit. Sybil generally avoided medical students. They prided themselves on studied beastliness. But now, in the grip of a powerful nervous impulse, she opened the tin, drew out one of the crisp paper cylinders, and inhaled its fierce perfume.

A Mr. Stanley, a barrister, well-known among the flash mob, had smoked cigarettes incessantly. Stanley, during his acquaintanceship with Sybil, had frequently remarked that a cigarette was the thing to steel a gambler's nerve.

Fetching the lucifers, Sybil placed the cigarette between her lips, as she'd seen Stanley do, struck a lucifer, and remembered to let the bulk of the sulphur burn away before applying the flame to the cigarette's tip. She drew hesitantly on the lit cigarette and was rewarded with an acrid portion of vile smoke that set her wracking like a consumptive. Eyes watering, she nearly flung the thing away.

She stood before the grate and forced herself to continue, drawing periodically on the cigarette and flicking pale delicate ash onto the coals with the gesture Stanley had used. It was barely tolerable, she decided, and where was the desired effect? She felt abruptly ill, her stomach churning with nausea, her hands gone cold as ice. Coughing explosively, she dropped the cigarette into the coals, where it burst into flame and was swiftly consumed.

She became painfully aware of the ticking of the clock.

Big Ben began to sound midnight.

Where was Mick?


She woke in darkness, filled with a fear she couldn't name. Then she remembered Mick. The lamp had gone out. The coals were dead. Scrambling to her feet, she fetched the box of lucifers, then felt her way into her room, where the tinny ticking of the clock guided her to the commode.

When she struck a match, the face of the clock seemed to swim in the sulphur glare.

It was half past one.

Had he come when she was sleeping, knocked, had no answer, and gone away without her? No, not Mick. He'd have found a way in, if he wanted her. Had he gulled her, then, for the cakey girl she surely was, to trust his promises?

A queer sort of calm swept over her, a cruel clarity. She remembered the departure date on the steamship ticket. He wouldn't sail from Dover till late tomorrow, and it seemed unlikely that he and General Houston would be departing London, after an important lecture, in the dead of night. She'd go to Grand's, then, and find Mick, confront him, and plead, threaten blackmail, exposure, whatever proved necessary.

What tin she had was in her muff. There was a cab-stand in Minories, by Goodman's Yard. She would go there now, and rouse a cabman to take her to Piccadilly.

Toby cried once, piteously, as she closed the door behind her. She scraped her shin cruelly in the dark, on Cairns' chained bicycle.

She was half the way down Minories to Goodman's Yard when she remembered her portmanteau, but there was no turning back.


Grand's night doorman was heavy-set, cold-eyed, chin-whiskered, stiff in one leg, and very certainly wouldn't allow Sybil into his hotel, not if he could help it. She'd twigged him from a block away, climbing down from her cabriolet—a big gold-braided bugaboo, lurking on the hotel's marble steps under great dolphin-wreathed lamps. She knew her doormen well enough; they played a major role in her life.

It was one thing to enter Grand's on Dandy Mick's arm, by daylight. But to walk in boldly from the midnight streets, as an unescorted woman, was another matter. Only whores did that, and the doorman would not let whores in. But she might think of a likely story to gull him, perhaps, if she thought of a very good lie, and if he were stupid, or careless, or weary. Or she might try to bribe him, though she had little enough of tin left, after the cab. And she was dressed proper, not in the flash clothes of a dollymop. She might, at a pinch, distract him. Smash a window with a cobblestone, and run past him when he came to look. It was hard to run in a crinoline, but he was lame, and slow. Or find a street-boy to throw a stone for her

Sybil stood in darkness, by the wooden hoardings of a construction site. Broadside posters loomed over her, bigger than bed-sheets, with great tattered shouting print DAILY NEWS World-Wide Circulation, LLOYD'S NEWS Only One Penny, SOUTHEASTERN RAILWAY Ramsgate & Margate 7/6. Sybil pulled one hand from her muff and gnawed feverishly at her fingernail, which smelled of Turkish tobacco. She was dully surprised to notice that her hand was blue-white with the cold, and trembling badly.

Pure luck, it seemed, rescued her then, or the nod of a sorrowing angel, for a shining gurney brougham came to a chugging halt in front of Grand's, its blue-coated fireman jumping down to lower the hinged step. Out came a rollicking mob of drunken Frenchmen in scarlet-lined capes, with brocade waistcoats and tasseled evening-canes, and two of them had women with them.

Sybil grabbed up her skirt on the instant and scurried forward, head down. Crossing the street, she was hidden from the doorman by the barricade of the gurney's gleaming coachwork. Then she simply walked around it, past the great wood-spoked wheels with their treads of rubber, and boldly joined the group. The Frenchies were parley-vousing at each other, mustache-stroking and giggling, and did not seem to notice her, nor care. She smiled piously at no one in particular, and stood very close to a tall one, who seemed drunkest. They staggered up the marble stairs, and the tall Frenchman slapped a pound-note at the doorman's hand, with the careless ease of a man who didn't know what real money was. The doorman blinked at it and touched his braided hat.

And Sybil was safely inside. She walked with the jabbering Frenchies across a wilderness of polished marble to the hotel-desk, where they collected their keys from the night-clerk and staggered up the curving stairway, yawning and grinning, leaving Sybil behind at the counter.

The night-clerk, who spoke French, was chuckling over something he'd overheard. He sidled down the length of linteled mahogany, with a smile for Sybil. How may I be of service, madame?

The words came hard, almost stammering at first. Could you tell me please, has a Mr. Michael or, rather is General Sam Houston still registered here?

Yes, madame. I did see General Houston, earlier this evening. However, he's in our smoking-room now Perhaps you could leave a message?

Smoking-room?

Yes—over there, behind the acanthus. The clerk nodded toward a massive door at the corner of the lobby. Our smoking-room is not for the ladies, of course Forgive me, madame, but you seem a bit distressed. If the matter's vital, perhaps I should send a page.

Yes, Sybil said, that would be wonderful. The night-clerk obligingly produced a sheet of cream-laid hotel stationery and proffered his gold-nibbed reservoir-pen.

She wrote hastily, folded the note, scrawled MR. MICHAEL RADLEY on the back. The night-clerk crisply rang a bell, bowed in response to her thanks, and went about his business.

Shortly, a yawning and sour-faced little page appeared and placed her note on a cork-topped salver.

Sybil trailed anxiously behind as he trudged to the smoking-room. It is for the General's personal secretary, she said.

 'Tis awright, miss, I know 'im. He heaved one-handed at the smoking-room door. As it opened, and the page passed through, Sybil peered in. As the door slowly closed, she had a long glimpse of Houston, bare-headed, shiny-faced, and sweaty-drunk, with one booted foot propped on the table, beside a cut-glass decanter. He had a wicked-looking jackknife in his hand, and was puffing smoke and jabbing at something—whittling, that was it, for the floor around his leather chair was littered with wood-shavings.

A tall bearded Englishman murmured something to Houston. The stranger had his left arm caught in a white silk sling, and looked sad-eyed and dignified and important. Mick stood at his side, bending at the waist to light the man's cheroot. Sybil saw him rasping at a steel sparker, on the end of a dangling rubber gas-tube, and then the door shut.

Sybil sat on a chaise-longue in the echoing marble lobby, warmth stealing through her damp, grimy shoes; her toes began to ache. Then the page emerged with Mick on his heels, Mick smiling back into the smoking-room and sketching out a cheery half-salute. Sybil rose from her seat. Seeing her there, his narrow face went bleak.

He came to her quickly, took her elbow. Bloody Christ, he muttered, what kind of silly note was that? Can't you make sense, girl?

What is it? she pleaded. Why didn't you come for me?

Bit of a contretemps. I'm afraid. Case of the fox biting his own arse. Might be funny if it weren't so bleeding difficult. But having you here now may change matters 

What's gone wrong? Who's that gentry cove with the gammy arm?

Bloody British diplomat as doesn't care for the General's plan to raise an army in Mexico. Never you mind him. Tomorrow we'll be in France, and he'll be here in London, annoyin' someone else. At least I hope so The General's queered things for us, though. Drunk as a lord and he's pulled one of his funny little tricks He's a nasty bastard when he drinks, truth to tell. Starts to forget his friends.

He's gulled you somehow, Sybil realized. He wants to cut you loose, is that it?

He's nicked my kino-cards, Mick said.

But I mailed them to Paris, poste restante Sybil said. Just as you told me to do.

Not those, you goose—the kino-cards from the speech!

Your theatre cards? He stole 'em?

He knew I had to pack my cards, take 'em along with me, don't you see? So he kept a watch on me somehow, and now he's nicked 'em from my baggage. Says he won't need me in France after all, so long as he's got my information. He'll hire some onion-eater can run a kino on the cheap. Or so he says.

But that's theft!

 'Borrowing,' according to him. Says he'll give me back my cards, as soon as he's had 'em copied. That way I don't lose nothin', you see?

Sybil felt dazed. Was he teasing her? But isn't that stealing, somehow?

Try arguing that with Samuel bloody Houston! He stole a whole damn country once, stole it clean and picked it to the bone!

But you're his man! You can't let him steal from you.

Mick cut her off. When it comes to that—you might well ask how I had that fancy French program made. You might say I borrowed the General's money for it, so to speak. He showed his teeth in a grin. Not the first time we've tried such a stunt on one another. It's a bit of a test, don't you see? Fellow has to be a right out-and-outer, to travel with General Houston 

Oh Lord, Sybil said, collapsing into her crinoline on the chaise. Mick, if you but knew what I've been thinking

Brace up, then! He hauled her to her feet. I need those cards and they're in his room. You're going to find them for me, and nick 'em back. And I'm going back in there and brass it out, cool as ice. He laughed. The old bastard mightn't have tried this, if not for my tricks at his lecture. You an' Corny Simms made him feel he was right and fly, pulling strings! But we'll make a pigeon of him yet, you and I, together 

I'm afraid, Mick, Sybil said. I don't know how to steal things!

You little goose, of course you do, Mick said.

Well, will you come with me and help, then?

Of course not! He'd know then, wouldn't he? I told him you were a newspaper friend of mine. If I stay too long talking, he'll smell a rat sure. He glared at her.

All right, Sybil said, defeated. Give me the key to his room.

Mick grunted. Key? I haven't any bloody key.

A wash of relief went through her. Well, then. I'm not a cracksman, you know!

Keep your voice down, else you'll tell everyone in Grand's His eyes glinted furiously. He was drunk, Sybil realized. She'd never seen Mick really drunk before, and now he was lushed, lightning-struck. It didn't show in his voice or his walk, but he was crazy and bold with it. I'll get you a key. Go to that counter-man, blarney him. Keep him busy. And don't look at me. He gave her half a shove. Go!

Terrified, she returned to the counter. The Grand's telegraph stood at the far end, a ticking brass machine on a low marble pedestal decorated with leafy gilt vines. Within a sort of bell-glass, a gilded needle swung to and fro, pointing out letters in a concentric alphabet. With every twitch of the needle, something in the marble base clunked methodically, causing another quarter-inch of neatly perforated yellow paper tape to emerge from the marble base. The night-clerk, who was punching binder-holes in a bundle of fan-fold paper, set his work aside, clipped on a pince-nez, and came toward her.

Yes, madame?

I need to send a telegram. It is rather urgent.

The clerk deftly assembled a small box of punch-cards, a hinged brass perforator, a neatly ruled form. He took out the reservoir-pen Sybil had used earlier. Yes, madame. Citizen-number?

Oh Would that be my number, or his?

That would depend, madame. Are you planning to pay by national credit?

May I charge it to my room? Sybil hedged.

Certainly, madame. Room number?

Sybil hesitated for as long as she dared. I suppose I'll pay cash, actually.

Very well. Now, the addressee's citizen-number?

I'm afraid I don't know it, actually. She blinked at the clerk and began to chew on one knuckle.

He was very patient. You do have a name and address, though?

Oh yes, Sybil said hastily. Mr. Charles Egremont, M.R, 'The Beeches,' Belgravia, London.

The clerk wrote this down. It is rather more costly to send a wire with only an address, madame. It's more efficient to route it direct through the Central Statistics Bureau. Sybil had not been looking for Mick. She had been afraid to look. Now, from the corner of her eye, she saw a dark form scuttle across the lobby floor. Mick was bent almost double, with his shoes off, the laces knotted around his neck. He charged headlong at the waist-high mahogany counter, grabbed the forward edge two-handed, vaulted over it in a split-second, and vanished.

He had made no sound at all.

Something to do with the way an Engine handles messages, the clerk was explaining.

Indeed, Sybil said. But I haven't his citizen-number. I shall have to pay the extra, then, shan't I? This is very important.

Yes, madame. I'm sure it is. Pray go on, and I shall take dictation.

I don't suppose I should begin with my address and the date? I mean, a telegram's not a letter, really, is it?

No, madame.

Or his address, either?

Brevity is the essence of telegraphy, madame.

Mick would be creeping to the hotel's mahogany pegboard, which hung clustered with room-keys. She couldn't see him, but now she imagined she could hear him moving, almost smell him, and the clerk needed only to glance to his right to discover a sneak-thief creeping toward him, crazy-eyed and crouching like an ape.

Please take this down, Sybil quavered. Dear Charles. The clerk began scribbling. Nine years ago you put me to the worst dishonor that a woman can know.

The clerk stared in horror at his pen, a hot flush creeping up past his collar.

Charles, you promised me that you would save my poor father. Instead you corrupted me, body and soul. Today I am leaving London, in the company of powerful friends. They know very well what a traitor you were to Walter Gerard, and to me. Do not attempt to find me, Charles. It would be useless. I do hope that you and Mrs. Egremont will sleep soundly tonight. Sybil shuddered. Sign that 'Sybil Gerard,' if you please.

Yes, madame, the clerk muttered, eyes downcast as Mick sprang silently back over the counter in his stocking feet. Mick crouched low, hidden by the counter's bulk, then crept off quickly on his haunches, waddling across the marble floor, like a monstrous duck. In a moment he had rolled behind a pair of overstuffed chairs.

What do I owe? Sybil asked the clerk politely.

Two and six, the clerk stammered, quite unable to meet her eyes.

She counted it out from the little clasp-purse she took from her muff, and left the red-faced clerk at his station, punching telegram-cards from his box.

Mick came strolling like a gentleman across the lobby. He paused beside a reading-rack hung with neatly ironed newspapers. He bent down, coolly re-tying his shoes, straightened, and she saw the glint of metal in his hand. Not bothering even to catch her eye, he tucked the key behind a cut-velvet cushion on the chaise-longue. Then he stood briskly, straightened his tie, brushed at his sleeves, and strode straight off into the smoking-room.

Sybil sat for a moment on the chaise, pretending to read a gold-spined monthly, 'Transactions of the Royal Society'. Carefully, with the fingertips of her right hand, she fished behind her for the key. Here it was, with the number 24 engraved on the oval brass. She yawned, in what she hoped was a ladylike fashion, and stood, to retire upstairs, entirely as if she had a room there.

Her feet ached.

As she trudged along the silent gas-lit hall, toward Houston's suite, she felt a sudden amazement at having struck out at Charles Egremont. Needing some dramatic message to distract the clerk, she'd blurted out threats and rage. It had come boiling out of her, almost without her will. It puzzled her, and even frightened her, after having imagined that she'd almost forgotten the man.

She could imagine the fear on Egremont's face when he read her telegram. She remembered his face well enough, fatuous and successful, which always looked as though it meant well, always apologized, always preached at her, and whined, and begged, and wept, and sinned. He was a fool.

But now she'd let Mick Radley set her to thieving. If she were clever, she should walk out of the Grand Hotel, vanish into the depths of London, and never see Radley again. She should not let the 'prentice oath hold her. To break an oath was frightening, but no more vile than her other sins. Yet somehow here she was; she had let him do with her as he would.

She stopped before the door, looked up and down the deserted corridor, fingered the stolen key. Why was she doing this? Because Mick was strong, and she was weak? Because he knew secrets that she didn't? For the first time, it occurred to her that she might be in love with him. Perhaps she did love him, in some strange way, and if that were true, it might explain matters to her, in a way which was almost soothing. If she were in love, she had a right to burn her bridges, to walk on air, to live by impulse. And if she loved Radley, it was finally something she knew, which he didn't. Her secret alone.

Sybil unlocked the door nervously, rapidly. She slipped through, shut it behind her, set her back against it. She stood in darkness.

There was a lamp in the room somewhere. She could smell its burnt wick. In the wall opposite, the outline emerged of a square curtained window to the street, between the curtains a faint knife-slice of upwashed gas-light. She faltered her way into the room, hands outstretched, until she felt the solid polished bulk of a bureau, and made out the dim sheen of a lamp-chimney there. She lifted the lamp, shook it. It had oil. Now she needed a lucifer.

She felt for drawers in the bureau. For some reason they were already open. She rustled through them. Stationery. Useless, and someone had spilled ink in one of the drawers; she could smell it.

Her fingers brushed a box of lucifers, which she recognized less by touch than by the dry familiar rattle. Her fingers, really, didn't seem to be working properly. The first lucifer popped and fizzled out, refusing to light, filling the room with a vile smell of sulphur. The second showed her the lamp. Her hands were trembling badly as she raised the chimney and applied flame to the wick.

She saw her own lamp-lit reflection staring wild-eyed from tilted cheval-glass, then doubled in beveled mirrors set into the twin doors of a wardrobe. She noticed clothing scattered on the bed, on the floor

A man was sitting on the arm of a chair, crouched there like a great shadowed crow, an enormous knife in his hand.

He stood then, but slowly, with a creak of leather, like some huge wooden puppet that had lain years in the dust. He was wrapped in a long and shapeless grey coat. His nose and jaw were draped with a dark kerchief.

Best be quiet now, missy, he said, holding up the massive blade—dark, cleaver-like steel. Sam comin'?

Sybil found her voice. Please don't kill me!

Old goat still whorin', is he? The slow Texian voice slid forth like treacle; Sybil could barely make out his words. You his fancy-gal?

No! Sybil said, her voice strangled. No, I'm not, I swear it! I I came here to steal from him, and that's the truth!

There was a ghastly silence.

Take a look 'round you.

Sybil did so, trembling. The room had been ransacked.

Nothin' here to steal, the man said. Where is he, gal?

He's downstairs, Sybil said. He's drunk! But I don't know him, I swear! My man sent me here, that's all! I didn't want to do this! He made me do it!

Quiet, now, he said. I wouldn't hurt a white woman, less I had to. Put out that lamp.

Let me go, she pleaded. I'll go straight away! I meant no harm!

Harm? The slow voice was heavy with gallows certainty. What harm there is, it's for Houston, and that's justice.

I didn't steal the cards! I didn't touch them!

 'Cards'? He laughed, a dry sound at the back of his throat.

The cards don't belong to Houston. He stole them!

Houston stole plenty, the man said, but clearly he was puzzled. He was thinking about her, and was not happy about it. What they call you?

Sybil Jones. She took a breath. I'm a British subject!

My, the man said. He clicked his tongue.

His masked face was unreadable. Sweat shone on a strip of pale smooth skin across the top of his forehead. A hat-brim had rested there, Sybil realized, to shield him from the Texian sun. He came forward now and took the lamp from her, turning down the wick. His fingers, when they brushed her hand, were dry and hard as wood.

In the darkness, there was only the pounding of her heart and the Texian's terrible presence.

You must be lonely here in London, Sybil blurted, desperate to avoid another silence.

Maybe Houston's lonesome. I got a better conscience. The Texian's voice was sharp. You ever ask if he's lonesome?

I don't know him, she insisted.

You're here. A woman come alone to his rooms.

I came for the kino-cards. Paper cards, with holes in them. That's all, I swear! No answer. Do you know what a kinotrope is?

 'Nother damn machine, the Texian said wearily.

Another silence.

Don't lie to me, he said at last. You're a whore, that's all. You ain't the first whore I ever seen.

She heard him cough behind his kerchief, and snort wetly. You ain't bad-lookin', though, he said. In Texas, you could many. Start all over.

I'm sure that would be wonderful, Sybil said.

Never enough white women in the country. Get you a decent man, 'stead o' some pimp. He lifted his kerchief, and spat on the floor.

Hate pimps, he announced tonelessly. Hate 'em like I hate Injuns. Or Mexicans. Mexican Injuns French Mexican Injuns with guns, three, four hundred strong. On horseback, got them wind-up rifles, closest thing to devils on earth.

But the Texians are heroes, Sybil said, desperately trying to remember a name from Houston's speech. I heard about about Alamo.

Goliad, the voice gone to a dry whisper, I was at Goliad.

I heard about that, too, Sybil said quickly. That must have been glorious.

The Texian hawked, spat again. Fought 'em two days. No water. Colonel Fannin surrendered. They took us prisoner, all the niceties, polite as you please. Next day they marched us out of town. Shot us down in cold blood. Just lined us up. Massacred us.

Sybil said nothing.

Massacred the Alamo. Burned all the bodies Massacred the Meir Expedition. Made 'em pick beans. Little clay lottery pot, pull out a black bean and they kill you. That's Mexicans for you.

Mexicans, she repeated.

Comanches are worse.

From somewhere off in the night came the scream of a great friction-brake, and then a dull distant pounding.

Black beans. Goliad. Her head was a Babel. Beans and massacre and this man whose skin was like leather. He stank like a navvy, of horses and sweat. Down Neal Street she'd once paid tuppence to view a diorama of some vast waste in America, a nightmare of twisted stone. The Texian looked born from such a place, and it came to her then that all the wildernesses of Houston's speech, all the places with such queer improbable names, were truly real, inhabited by creatures such as this. And Mick had said that Houston had stolen a country once, and now this one had followed, avenging angel. She fought down an insane desire to laugh.

She remembered the old woman then, the vendor of rock-oil in Whitechapel, and the queer look she'd given Mick when he'd questioned her. Did others work in concert with the angel of Goliad? How had so strange a figure managed to enter Grand's tonight, to enter a locked room? Where could such a man hide, even in London, even amid the tattered hordes of American refugees?

Say he's drunk? the Texian said.

Sybil started horribly. What?

Houston.

Oh. Yes. In the smoking-room. Very drunk.

Be his last, then. He alone?

He Mick. He's with a tall man. I don't know him.

Beard on 'im? Arm broke?

I Yes.

He made a sucking sound between his teeth; then leather creaked as he shrugged.

Something rattled, to Sybil's left. In the faint glow from the curtained window she glimpsed the gleaming facets of the cut-glass door-knob as it began to twist. The Texian leapt from his chair.

With the palm of one hand pressed tight against her mouth, he held the great dirk before her, a hideous thing like an elongated cleaver, tapering to a point. A length of brass ran along its spine; with the blade inches from her eyes she saw notches and nicks along the brass. And then the door was opening, Mick ducking through, his head and shoulders stenciled out by the light in the corridor.

She must have struck her head against the wall when the Texian flung her aside, but then she was kneeling, the crinoline bunched beneath her, watching the man hoist Mick against the wall, a single great hand about his throat, the heels of Mick's shoes beating a frantic tattoo against the wainscoting—until the long blade struck, twisted, struck again, filling the room with the hot reek of Butcher Row.


And all that happened after, in that room, was a dream to Sybil, or a play she watched, or some kino-show wrought with balsa-bits so numerous, so tiny, and so cleverly worked, as to blur reality. For the Texian, lowering Mick quietly to the floor, closed and re-locked the door, his movements unhurried and methodical.

She swayed where she knelt, then sagged against the wall behind the bureau. Mick was dragged away, heels scraping, into the deeper darkness beside the wardrobe. The Texian knelt over him—there was a rustle of clothing, the slap of the card-case flung aside, a jingle of change and the sound of a single coin, falling, rolling, spinning on the hardwood floor

And there came from the door a scratching, the rattle of metal on metal—the sound of a drunken man trying a keyhole.

Houston, throwing the door wide, lurched forward on his heavy stick. He belched thunderously and rubbed the site of his old wound. Sons of bitches, he said, hoarse with drink, listing violently, the stick coming down with a sharp crack at each step. Radley? Come out, you little whelp. He'd neared the bureau now, and Sybil snatched her fingers back silently, afraid of the weight of his boots.

The Texian closed the door.

Radley!

Evenin', Sam.

Her room above the Hart seemed distant as childhood's first memories, here in the smell of slaughter, in this dark where giants moved—Houston reeled suddenly to slash at the curtains with his cane, tore them open, gas-light catching the patterns of frost on the glass of each mullioned pane, illuminating the Texian's kerchief and the grim eyes above it, eyes distant and merciless as winter stars. Houston staggered at the sight, the striped blanket sliding from his shoulders. His medals gleamed, quivered.

Rangers sent me, Sam. Mick's little pepperbox pistol looked a toy in the Texian's hand, the clustered barrels winking as he took aim.

Who are you, son? Houston asked, all trace of drunkenness abruptly gone from his deep voice. You Wallace? Take off that neckcloth. Face me man-to-man 

You ain't giving no more orders, General. Shouldn't ought to have took what you did. You robbed us, Sam. Where is it? Where's that treasury money?

Ranger, Houston said, his voice a rich syrup of patience and sincerity, you've been misled. I know who sent you, and I know their lies and slanders against me. But I swear to you that I stole nothing—those funds are mine by right, the sacred trust of the Texas government-in-exile.

You sold Texas out for British gold, the Ranger said. We need that money, for guns and food. We're starvin', and they're killin' us. A pause. And you mean to help 'em do it.

The Republic of Texas can't defy the world's great powers, Ranger. I know it's bad in Texas, and my heart aches for my country, but there can't be peace till I'm back in command.

You got no money left, do you? the Ranger said. I looked, and it ain't here. You sold your fancy estate in the countryside You threw it all away, Sam, on whores and drink and fancy theatre shows for foreigners. And now you want to come back with a Mexican army. You're a thief, and a drunk, and a traitor.

God damn you, Houston roared, and flung open his coat with both hands, you're a cowardly assassin, you filthy-mouthed son of a bitch. If you think you have the guts to kill the father of your country, then shoot for the heart. He thumped his chest.

For Texas. The pepperbox spat a flare of orange flame, edged with blue, hurting Houston back against the wall. Houston crashed to the floor as the avenger pounced, crouching to thrust the muzzles of the little pistol against the gaudy leopard waistcoat. There was a gun-blast into Houston's chest, then another, then a loud snap as the delicate trigger broke in the Ranger's fist.

The Ranger flung Mick's gun aside. Houston sprawled, unmoving, red sparks crawling through the fur of the leopard waistcoat.

There were sleepy shouts of alarm from another room. The Texian seized Houston's cane and began to batter the window; glass shattered, crashing to the pavement below; mullions gave way, and then he was scrambling out, across the sill. He froze there, for an instant, icy wind tugging at his long coat, and Sybil, in her trance, was reminded of her first sight of him a vast dark crow, poised now for flight.

He jumped from sight, Houston's destroyer, the angel of Goliad, and was gone, leaving her in silence and rising terror, as if his vanishing had broken a spell. She began to crawl forward, quite without aim and cruelly hampered by her crinoline, yet it was as if her limbs moved of their own accord. The heavy cane lay on the floor, but its head, a gilt brass raven, had snapped free of the shaft.

Houston moaned.

Please be quiet, she said. You're dead.

Who are you? he said, and coughed.

The floor was littered with shards of glass, sharp under her palms. No. Bright. Like pebbles. The cane, she saw, was hollow, and had spilled its tight nesting of cotton-wool, where more of the pebbles nested. Bright, bright diamonds. Her hands scooped them together, wadding the cotton-wool, to thrust the lot into her bodice, between her breasts.

She turned to Houston then. He still lay on his back, and she watched in fascination as a bloodstain spread along his ribs. Help me, Houston grunted. I can't breathe. He tugged at his waistcoat's buttons and it came open, showing neat inner pockets of black silk, stuffed tight with dense packs of paper thick punch-card packs in glued brown wrappers, their intricate perforations surely ruined now by the hot impact of bullets And blood, for at least one slug had struck him true.

Sybil rose, and walked, giddily, toward the door. Her foot squelched moistly in the red-splashed shadows by the wardrobe, and she looked down, to see an open card-case in red morocco, with a pair of tickets in a heavy nickel-plate clip. She stooped, picked it up.

Get me to my feet, Houston demanded, his voice stronger now, tinged with urgency and irritation. Where's my walking-stick? Where's Radley?

The room seemed to rock beneath her, like a ship at sea, but she crossed to the door, opened it, stepped out, closed it behind her, and continued, like any gentry-girl, along the gas-lit and utterly respectable corridors of Grand's Hotel.


The South-Eastern Railway Company's London Bridge Terminus was a vast drafty hall of iron and soot-blown glass. Quakers moved among the avenues of benches, offering pamphlets to the seated travelers. Red-coated Irish soldiers, red-eyed from the night's gin, glowered at the close-shaven missionaries as they passed. The French passengers all seemed to be returning home with pineapples, sweet exotic bounty from the docks of London. Even the plump little actress who sat opposite Sybil had her pineapple, its green spikes protruding from a covered basket at her feet.


The train flew through Bermondsey and out into little streets of new brick, red tile. Dust-heaps, market-gardens, waste-ground. A tunnel.

The darkness about her stank of burnt gunpowder.

Sybil closed her eyes.

When she opened them, she saw crows flapping above a barren down, and the wires of the electric telegraph all alive, blurring, moving up and down in the intervals between poles, dancing in the wind of her passage toward France.


This image, surreptitiously daguerreotyped by a member of the Public Morals Section of the Surete Generale, January 30, 1855, presents a young woman seated at a table on the terrace of the Cafe Madeleine, No. 4 Boulevard Malesherbes. The woman, seated alone, has a china teapot and cup before her. Justification of the image reveals certain details of costume ribbons, frills, her cashmere shawl, her gloves, her earrings, her elaborate bonnet. The woman's clothing is of French origin, and new, and of high quality. Her face, slightly blurred by long camera exposure, seems pensive, lost in thought.

Justification of background detail reveals No. 3 Boulevard Malesherbes, the offices of the Compagnie Sud Atlantique Transport Maritimes. The office window contains a large model steamboat with three funnels, a French-designed craft for the trans-Atlantic colonial trade. A faceless elderly man, evidently an accidental subject, seems lost in contemplation of the ship; his lone figure emerges therefore from the swiftly moving blurs of the Parisian street-crowd. His head is bare, his shoulders slump, and he leans heavily on a cane, apparently of cheap rattan. He is as unaware of the young woman's proximity as she is of his.

She is Sybil Gerard.

He is Samuel Houston.

Their paths diverge forever.



SECOND ITERATION

Derby Day

He is frozen in mid-stride as he edges diagonally into the depths of the holiday crowd. The angle of aperture has captured a fraction of his face high cheekbone, thick dark beard trimmed close, right ear, stray lock of hair visible between corduroy coat-collar and striped cap. The cuffs of his dark trousers, buttoned tight in leather spats above hobnailed walking-boots, are speckled to the shins with the chalky mud of Surrey. The left epaulet of his worn, waterproof coat buttons sturdily over the strap of a military-issue binocular case; the lapels flap open in the heat, showing stout gleaming toggles of brass. His hands are jammed deep in the long coat's pockets.

His name is Edward Mallory.

He tramped through a lacquered gleam of carriages, blindered horses cropping noisily at the turf, amid childhood smells of harness, sweat, and grassy dung. His hands inventoried the contents of his various pockets. Keys, cigar-case, billfold, card-case. The thick staghorn handle of his multi-bladed Sheffield knife. Field notebook—most precious item of all. A handkerchief, a pencil-stub, a few loose shillings. A practical man. Dr. Mallory knew that every sporting-crowd has its thieves, none of them dressed to match their station. Anyone here might be a thief. It is a fact; it is a risk.

A woman blundered into Mallory's path, and his hobnails tore the flounce of her skirt. Turning, wincing, she tugged herself loose with a squeak of crinoline as Mallory touched his cap, and marched quickly on. Some farmer's wife, a clumsy, great red-cheeked creature, civilized and English as a dairy-cow. Mallory's eye was still accustomed to a wilder breed, the small brown wolf-women of the Cheyenne, with their greased black braids and beaded leather leggings. The hoop-skirts in the crowd around him seemed some aberrant stunt of evolution; the daughters of Albion had got a regular scaffolding under there now, all steel and whalebone.

Bison; that was it. American bison, just that very hoopskirt silhouette, when the big rifle took them down; they had a way of falling, in the tall grass, suddenly legless, a furry hillock of meat. The great Wyoming herds would stand quite still for death, merely twitching their ears in puzzlement at the distant report of the rifle.

Now Mallory threaded his way among this other herd, astonished that mere fashion could carry its mysterious impetus so far. The men, among their ladies, seemed a different species, nothing so extreme—save, perhaps, their shiny toppers, though his inner eye refused to find any hat exotic. He knew too much about hats, knew too many of the utterly mundane secrets of their manufacture. He could see at a glance that most of the hats around him were dead cheap, Engine-made, pre-cut in a factory, though looking very nearly as fine as a craftsman-hatter's work, and at half the price or less. He had helped his father in the little haberdashery in Lewes punching, stitching, blocking, sewing. His father, dipping felt in the mercury bath, had seemed not to mind the stench

Mallory was not sentimental about the eventual death of his father's trade. He put it from his mind, seeing that drink was being sold from a striped canvas tent, men crowding the counter, wiping foam from their mouths. A thirst struck him at the sight of it. Veering around a trio of sporting-gents, crops under their arms, who argued the day's odds, he reached the counter and tapped it with a shilling.

Pleasure, sar? asked the barman.

A huckle-buff.

Sussex man, sar?

I am. Why?

Can't make you a proper huckle-buff, sar, as I haven't barley-water, the fellow explained, looking briskly sad. Not much call for it outside Sussex.

Very nearly two years since I've tasted huckle-buff, Mallory said.

Mix you a lovely bumbo, sar. Much like a huckle-buff. No? A good cigar, then. Only tuppence! Fine Virginia weed. The barman presented a crooked cheroot from a wooden box.

Mallory shook his head. When I've the taste for something, I'm a stubborn man. A huckle-buff or nothing.

The barman smiled. Won't be drove? A Sussex man, sure! I'm a county-man meself. Take this fine cigar gratis, sir, with my complimums.

Very decent of you, Mallory said, surprised. He strolled off, shaking a lucifer from his cigar-case. Firing the match on his boot, he puffed the cheroot into life and tucked his thumbs jauntily in the arm-holes of his waistcoat.

The cigar tasted like damp gunpowder. He yanked it from his mouth. A cheap paper band girdled the foul, greenish-black leaf, a little foreign flag with stars and bars and the motto VICTORY BRAND. Yankee war-rubbish; he flung it away, so that it bounced sparking from the side of a gypsy-wagon, where a dark-headed child in rags snatched it quickly up.

To Mallory's left, a spanking new steam-gurney chugged into the crowd, the driver erect at his station. As the man drew his brake-lever, a bronze bell clanged in the gurney's maroon prow, people scattering sulkily before the vehicle's advance. Above them, passengers lounged in velvet coach-seats, the folding spark-shield accordioned back to admit the sun. A grinning old swell in kid gloves sipped champagne with a pair of young misses, either daughters or mistresses. The gurney's door gleamed with a coat-of-arms, cog-wheel azure and crossed hammers argent. Some Rad's emblem unknown to Mallory, who knew the arms of every savant Lord—though he was weak on the capitalists.

The machine was headed east, toward the Derby garages; he fell in behind it, letting it clear his path, easily keeping pace and smiling as draymen struggled with frightened horses. Pulling his notebook from his Docket, stumbling a little in the gouged turf-tracks of the brougham's thick wheels, he thumbed through the colorful pages of his spotter's guide. It was last year's edition; he could not find the coat-of-arms. Pity, but it meant little, when new Lords were ennobled weekly. As a class, the Lordships dearly loved their steam-chariots.

The machine set its course for the gouts of greyish vapor rising behind the pillared grandstands of Epsom. It humped slowly up the curb of a paved access-road. Mallory could see the garages now, a long rambling structure in the modern style, girdered in skeletal iron and roofed with bolted sheets of tin-plate, its hard lines broken here and there by bright pennants and tin-capped ventilators.

He followed the huffing land-craft until it eased into a stall. The driver popped valves with a steaming gush. Stable-monkeys set to work with greasing-gear as the passengers decamped down a folding gangway, the Lord and his two women passing Mallory on their way toward the grandstand. Britain's self-made elite, they trusted he was watching and ignored him serenely. The driver lugged a massive hamper in their wake. Mallory touched his own striped cap, identical with the driver's, and winked, but the man made no response.

Strolling the length of the garages, spotting steamers from his guidebook. Mallory marked each new sighting with his pencil-stub and a small thrill of satisfaction. Here was Faraday, great savant-physicist of the Royal Society, there Colgate the soap magnate, and here a catch indeed, the visionary builder Brunei. A very few machines bore old family arms; landowners, whose fathers had been dukes and earls, when such titles had existed. Some of the fallen old nobility could afford steam; some had more initiative than others, and did what they could to keep up.

Arriving at the southern wing. Mallory found it surrounded by a barricade of clean new saw-horses, smelling of pitch. This section, reserved for the racing-steamers, was patrolled by a squad of uniformed foot-police. One of them carried a spring-wind Cutts-Maudslay of a model familiar to Mallory, the Wyoming expedition having been provided with six of them. Though the Cheyenne had regarded the stubby Birmingham-made machine-carbine with a useful awe. Mallory knew that it was temperamental to the point of unreliability. Inaccurate to the point of uselessness as well, unless one were popping off the entire thirty rounds into a pack of pursuers—something Mallory himself had once done from the aft firing-position of the expedition's steam-fortress.

Mallory doubted that the fresh-faced young copper had any notion what a Cutts-Maudslay might do if fired into an English crowd. He shook off the dark thought with an effort.

Beyond the barricade, each separate stall was carefully shielded from spies and odds-makers by tall baffles of tarpaulin, tautly braced by criss-crossed cables threaded through flagpoles. Mallory worked his way through an eager crowd of gawkers and steam-hobbyists. Two coppers stopped him brusquely at the gate. He displayed his citizen's number-card and his engraved invitation from the Brotherhood of Vapor Mechanics. Making careful note of his number, the policemen checked it against a thick notebook crammed with fan-fold. At length they pointed out the location of his hosts, cautioning him not to wander.

As a further precaution, the Brotherhood had appointed their own look-out. The man squatted on a folding-stool outside the tarpaulin, squinting villainously and clutching a long iron spanner. Mallory proffered his invitation. The guard stuck his head past a narrow flap in the tarpaulin, shouted, Your brother's here, Tom, and ushered Mallory through.

Daylight vanished in the stink of grease, metal-shavings, and coal-dust. Four Vapor Mechanics, in striped hats and leather aprons, were checking a blueprint by the harsh glare of a carbide lamp; beyond them, a queer shape threw off highlights from curves of enameled tin.

He took the thing for a boat, in the first instant of his surprise, its scarlet hull absurdly suspended between a pair of great wheels. Driving-wheels, he saw, stepping closer; the burnished piston-brasses vanished into smoothly flared openings in the insubstantial-looking shell or hull. Not a boat it resembled a teardrop, rather, or a great tadpole. A third wheel, quite small and vaguely comical, was swivel-mounted at end of the long tapered tail.

He made out the name painted in black and gilt across the bulbous prow, beneath a curved expanse of delicately leaded glass Zephyr.

Come, Ned, join us! his brother sang out, beckoning. Don't be shy! The others chuckled at Tom's sauciness as Mallory strode forward, his hobnails scraping the floor. His little brother Tom, nineteen years old, had grown his first mustache; it looked as though a cat could lick it off. Mallory offered his hand to his friend, Tom's master. Mr. Michael Godwin, sir! he said.

Dr. Mallory, sir! said Godwin, a fair-haired engineer of forty years, with mutton-chop whiskers over cheeks pitted by smallpox. Small and stout, with shrewd, hooded eyes, Godwin began a bow, thought better of it, clapped Mallory gently across the back, and introduced his fellows. They were Elijah Douglas, a journeyman, and Henry Chesterton, a master of the second degree.

A privilege, sirs, Mallory declared. I expected fine things from you, but this is a revelation.

What do you think of her. Dr. Mallory?

A far cry from our steam-fortress, I should say!

She was never made for your Wyoming, Godwin said, and that accounts for a certain lack of guns and armor. Form emerges from function, as you so often told us.

Small for a racing-gurney, isn't she? Mallory ventured, somewhat at a loss. Peculiarly shaped.

Built upon principles, sir, newly discovered principles indeed. And a fine tale behind her invention, having to do with a colleague of yours. You recall the late Professor Rudwick. I'm sure.

Ah, yes, Rudwick, Mallory muttered, then hesitated. Hardly your new-principle man, Rudwick

Douglas and Chesterton were watching him with open curiosity.

We were both paleontologists, Mallory said, suddenly uncomfortable, but the fellow fancied himself gentry of a sort. Put on fine airs and entertained outmoded theories. Rather muddy in his thinking, in my opinion.

The two mechanics looked doubtful.

I'm not one to speak ill of the dead, Mallory assured them. Rudwick had his friends, I've mine, and there's an end to it.

You do remember, Godwin persisted, Professor Rudwick's great flying reptile?

Quetzalcoatlus, Mallory said. Indeed, that was a coup; one can't deny it.

They've studied its remains in Cambridge, Godwin said, at the Institute of Engine Analytics.

I plan to do a bit of work there myself, on the Brontosaurus, Mallory said, unhappy with the direction the conversation seemed to be taking.

You see, Godwin continued, the cleverest mathematicians in Britain were snug there, spinning their great brass, while you and I froze in the mud of Wyoming. Pecking holes in their cards to puzzle out how a creature of such a size could fly.

I know about the project, Mallory said. Rudwick published on the topic. But 'pneumo-dynamics' isn't my field. Frankly, I'm not sure there's much to it, scientifically. It seems a bit well airy, if you follow me. He smiled.

Great practical applications, possibly, Godwin said. Lord Babbage himself took a hand in the analysis.

Mallory thought about it. I'll concede there's likely something to pneumatics, then, if it's caught the eye of the great Babbage! To improve the art of ballooning, perhaps? Balloon-flight, that's a military field. There's always ample funding for the sciences of war.

No, sir; I mean in the practical design of machinery.

A flying machine, you mean? Mallory paused. You're not trying to tell me this vehicle of yours can fly, are you?

The mechanics laughed politely. No, Godwin said, and I can't say that all that airy Engine-spinning has come to much, directly. But we now understand certain matters having to do with the behavior of air in motion, the principles of atmospheric resistance. New principles, little-known as yet.

But we mechanics, said Mr. Chesterton proudly,  'ave put 'em to practical use, sir, in the shaping of our Zephyr.

 'Line-streaming,' we call it, Tom said.

So you've 'line-streamed' this gurney of yours, eh? That's why it looks so much like, er

Like a fish, Tom said.

Exactly, said Godwin. A fish! It's all to do with the action of fluids, you see. Water. Air. Chaos and turbulence! It's all in the calculations.

Remarkable, Mallory said. So I take it that these principles of turbulence—

A sudden blistering racket erupted from a neighboring stall. The walls shook and a fine sifting of soot fell from the ceiling.

That'll be the Italians, Godwin shouted. They've brought in a monster this year!

Makes a mortal hogo of a stink! Tom complained.

Godwin cocked his head. Hear them try-rods clacking on the down-stroke? Bad tolerances. Slovenly foreign work! He doffed his cap and dusted soot against his knee.

Mallory's head was ringing. Let me buy you a drink! he shouted.

Godwin cupped his ear blankly. What?

Mallory pantomimed; lifted a fist to his mouth, with his thumb cocked. Godwin grinned. He had a quick, bellowed word with Chesterton, over the blueprints. Then Godwin and Mallory ducked out into the sunshine.

Bad try-rods, the guard outside said smugly. Godwin nodded, and handed the man his leather apron. He took a plain black coat, instead, and traded his engineer's cap for a straw wide-awake.

They left the racing-enclosure. I can only spare a few minutes, Godwin apologized.  'The Master's eye melts the metal,' as they say. He hooked a pair of smoked spectacles over his ears. Some of these hobbyists know me, and might try to follow us But never mind that. It's good to see you again, Ned. Welcome back to England.

I won't keep you long, Mallory said. I wanted a private word or two. About the boy, and such.

Oh, Tom's a fine lad, said Godwin. He's learning. He means well.

I hope he'll prosper.

We do our best, Godwin said. I was sorry to hear from Tom about your father. Him taking so ill, and all.

 'Ould Mallory, he won't a-go till he's guv away his last bride,'  Mallory quoted, in his broadest Sussex drawl. That's what Father always tells us. He wants to see all his girls married. He's a game sort, my poor old dad.

He must take great comfort in a son like yourself, Godwin said. So, how does London suit you? Did you take the holiday train?

I've not been in London. I've been in Lewes, with the family. Rode the morning train from there to Leatherhead; then I tramped it.

You walked to the Derby from Leatherhead? That's ten miles or more!

Mallory smiled. You've seen me tramp twenty, cross-country in the badlands of Wyoming, hunting fossils. I'd a taste to see good English countryside again. I'm only just back from Toronto, with all our crates of plastered bones, while you've been here for months, getting your fill of this. He waved his arm.

Godwin nodded. What do you make of the place, then—now you're home again?

London Basin anticline, Mallory said. Tertiary and Eocene chalk-beds, bit of modern flinty clay.

Godwin laughed. We're all of us modern flinty clay Here we go, then; these lads sell a decent brew.

They walked down a gentle slope to a crowded dray laden with ale-kegs. The proprietors had no huckle-buff. Mallory bought a pair of pints.

It was good of you to accept our invitation, Godwin said. I know that you're a busy man, sir, what with your famous geologic controversies and such.

No busier than yourself, Mallory said. Solid engineering work. Directly practical and useful. I envy that, truly.

No, no, said Godwin. That brother of yours, he thinks the world of you. So do we all! You're the coming man, Ned. Your star is rising.

We had excellent luck in Wyoming, certainly, Mallory said. We made a great discovery. But without you and your steam-fortress, those red-skins would have made short work of us.

They weren't so bad, once they cozied up and had a taste of whiskey.

Your savage respects British steel, Mallory said. Theories of old bones don't much impress him.

Well, Godwin said, I'm a good Party man, and I'm with Lord Babbage. 'Theory and practice must be as bone and sinew.' 

That worthy sentiment calls for another pint, said Mallory. Godwin wanted to pay. Pray allow me, Mallory said. I'm still spending my bonus, from the expedition.

Godwin, pint in hand, led Mallory out of ear-shot of the other drinkers. He gazed about carefully, then doffed his specs and looked Mallory in the eye. Do you trust in your good fortune, Ned?

Mallory stroked his beard. Say on.

The touts are quoting odds of ten-to-one against our Zephyr. 

Mallory chuckled. I'm no gambler, Mr. Godwin! Give me solid facts and evidence, and there I'll take my stand. But I'm no flash fool, to hope for unearned riches.

You took the risk of Wyoming. You risked your very life.

But that depended on my own abilities, and those of my colleagues.

Exactly! Godwin said. That's my own position, to the very letter! Listen a moment. Let me tell you about our Brotherhood of Vapor Mechanics.

Godwin lowered his voice. The head of our trades-union, Lord Scowcroft He was simple Jim Scowcroft in the bad old days, one of your popular agitators, but he made his peace with the Rads. Now he's rich, and been to Parliament and such; a very clever man. When I went to Lord Scowcroft with my plans for the Zephyr, he spoke to me just as you did now facts and evidence. 'Master first-degree Godwin,' he says, 'I can't fund you with the hard-earned dues of our Brothers unless you can show me, in black and white, how it shall profit us.'

So I told him 'Your Lordship, the construction of steam-gurneys is one of the nicest luxury trades in the country. When we go to Epsom Downs, and this machine of ours leaves the competitors eating her dust, the gentry will stand in queues for the famous work of the Vapor Mechanics.' And that's how it will be, Ned.

If you win the race, Mallory said.

Godwin nodded somberly. I make no cast-iron promises. I'm an engineer; I know full well how iron can bend, and break, and rust, and burst. You surely know it too, Ned, for you saw me work repair on that blasted steam-fortress till I thought I should go mad But I know my facts and figures. I know pressure differentials, and engine duty, and crank-shaft torque, and wheel diameters. With disaster barred, our little Zephyr will breeze past her rivals as if they were stock-still.

It sounds splendid. I'm glad for you. Mallory sipped his ale. Now tell me what should happen if disaster strikes?

Godwin smiled. Then I lose, and am left penniless. Lord Scowcroft was liberal, by his own lights, but there are always extra costs in such a project. I've put everything in my machine my expedition bonus from the Royal Society, even a small bequest I had of a maiden aunt, God rest her.

Mallory was shocked. Everything?

Godwin chuckled dryly. Well, they can't take what I know, can they? I shall still have my skills; mayhap I'd undertake another Royal Society expedition. They pay well enough. But I'm risking all I have in England. It's fame or famine, Ned, and naught between.

Mallory stroked his beard. You startle me, Mr. Godwin. You always seemed such a practical man.

Dr. Mallory, my audience today is the very cream of Britain. The Prime Minister is here today. The Prince Consort is in attendance. Lady Ada Byron is here, and betting lavishly, if rumor's true. When will I have another such chance?

I do follow your logic, Mallory said, though I can't say I approve. But then, your station in life allows such a risk. You're not a married man, are you?

Godwin sipped his ale. Neither are you, Ned.

No, but I have eight younger brothers and sisters, my old dad mortal ill, my mother eaten-up with the rheumatics. I can't gamble my family's livelihood.

The odds are ten-to-one, Ned. Fool's odds! They should be five-to-three in Zephyr's favor.

Mallory said nothing. Godwin sighed. It's a pity. I dearly wanted to see some good friend win that bet. A big win, a flash win! And I myself can't do it, you see? I wanted to, but I've spent my last pound on Zephyr. 

Perhaps a modest wager, Mallory ventured. For friendship's sake.

Bet ten pounds for me, Godwin said suddenly. Ten pounds, as a loan. If you lose, I'll pay you back somehow, in days to come. If you win, we'll split a hundred pounds tonight, half-and-half. What do you say? Will you do that for me?

Ten pounds! A heavy sum

I'm good for it.

I trust that you are  Mallory now saw no easy way to refuse. The man had given Tom a place in life, and Mallory felt the debt. Very well, Mr. Godwin. To please you.

You shan't regret it, Godwin said. He brushed ruefully at the frayed sleeves of his frock-coat. Fifty pounds. I can use it. A triumphant inventor, on the rise in life and such, shouldn't have to dress like a parson.

I shouldn't think you'd waste good money on vanities.

It's not vanity to dress as befits one's station. Godwin looked him over, sharp-eyed. That's your old Wyoming tramping-coat, isn't it?

A practical garment, Mallory said.

Not for London. Not for giving fancy lectures to fine London ladies with a modish taste in natural-history.

I'm not ashamed of what I am, Mallory said stoutly.

Simple Ned Mallory, Godwin nodded, come to Epsom in an engineer's cap, so the lads won't feel anxious at meeting a famous savant. I know why you did that, Ned, and I admire it. But mark my word, you'll be Lord Mallory some day, as surely as we stand here drinking. You'll have a fine silk coat, and a ribbon on your pocket, and stars and medals from all the learned schools. For you're the man dug up the great Land Leviathan, and made wondrous sense from a tangle of rocky bones. That's what you are now, Ned, and you might as well face up to it.

It's not so simple as you think, Mallory protested. You don't know the politics of the Royal Society. I'm a Catastrophist. The Uniformitarians hold sway, when it comes to the granting of tenures and honors. Men like Lyell, and that damned fool Rudwick.

Charles Darwin's a Lordship. Gideon Mantell's a Lordship, and his Iguanodon's a shrimp, ranked next to your Brontosaur.

Don't you speak ill of Gideon Mantell! He's the finest man of science Sussex ever had, and he was very kind to me.

Godwin looked down into his empty mug. I beg your pardon, he said. I spoke a bit too frankly, I can see that. We're far from wild Wyoming, where we sat about a campfire as simple brother Englishmen, scratching wherever it itched.

He put his smoked spectacles on. But I remember those theory-talks you'd give us, explaining what those bones were all about. 'Form follows function.' 'The fittest survive.' New forms lead the way. They may look queer at first, but Nature tests them fair and square against the old, and if they're sound in principle, then the world is theirs. Godwin looked up. If you can't see that your theory is bone to my sinew, then you're not the man I take you for.

Mallory removed his cap. It's I who should beg your pardon, sir. Forgive my foolish temper. I hope you'll always speak to me frankly, Mr. Godwin, ribbons on my chest or no. May I never be so unscientific as to close my eyes to honest truth. He offered his hand.

Godwin shook it.

A fanfare rang from across the course, the crowd responding with a rustle and a roar. All around them, people began to move, migrating toward the stands like a vast herd of ruminants.

I'm off to make that wager we discussed, Mallory said.

I must get back to my lads. Join us after the run? To split the winnings?

Certainly, Mallory said.

Let me take that empty pint, Godwin offered. Mallory gave it to him, and walked away.


Having taken leave of his friend. Mallory instantly regretted his promise. Ten pounds was a stiff sum indeed; he himself had survived on little more per annum, during his student days.

And yet, he considered, strolling in the general direction of the book-makers' canopied stalls, Godwin was a most exacting technician and a scrupulously honest man. He had no reason whatever to doubt Godwin's estimates of the race's outcome, and a man who wagered handsomely on Zephyr might leave Epsom that evening with a sum equivalent to several years' income. If one were to bet thirty pounds, or forty

Mallory had very nearly fifty pounds on deposit in a City bank, the better part of his expedition bonus. He wore an additional twelve in the stained canvas money-belt firmly cinched beneath his waistcoat.

He thought of his poor father gone feeble with hatter's madness, poisoned by mercury, twitching and muttering in his chair by the hearth in Surrey. A portion of Mallory's money was already allocated for the coal that fed that hearth.

Still, one might come away with four hundred pounds But no, he would be sensible, and wager only the ten, fulfilling his agreement with Godwin. Ten pounds would be a sharp loss, but one he could bear. He worked the fingers of his right hand between the buttons of his waistcoat, feeling for the buttoned flap of the canvas belt.

He chose to place his bet with the thoroughly modern firm of Dwyer and Company, rather than the venerable and perhaps marginally more reputable Tattersall's. He had frequently passed Dwyer's brightly lit establishment in St. Martin's Lane, hearing the deep brassy whirring of the three Engines they employed. He did not care to lay such a wager with any of the dozens of individual book-makers elevated above the throng on their high stools, though they were nearly as reliable as the larger firms. The crowd kept them so; Mallory himself had witnessed the near lynching of a defaulting betting-man at Chester. He still recalled the grisly shout of Welsher! pitched like a cry of Fire! going up inside the railed enclosure, and the rush against a man in a black cap, who was buried down and savagely booted. Beneath the surface of the good-natured racing-throng lay an ancient ferocity. He'd discussed the incident with Lord Darwin, who'd likened the action to the mobbing of crows

His thoughts turned to Darwin as he queued for the steam-racing wicket. Mallory had been an early and passionate supporter of the man, whom he regarded as one of the great minds of the age; but he'd come to suspect that the reclusive Lord, though clearly appreciating Mallory's support, considered him rather brash. When it came to matters of professional advancement, Darwin was of little use. Thomas Henry Huxley was the man for that, a great social theorist as well as an accomplished scientist and orator

In the queue to Mallory's immediate right lounged a swell in subdued City finery, that day's number of Sporting Life tucked beneath an immaculate elbow. As Mallory watched, the man stepped to the wicket and placed a wager of one hundred pounds on a horse called Alexandra's Pride.

Ten pounds on the Zephyr, to win, Mallory told the betting-clerk at the steam-wicket, presenting a five-pound note and five singles. As the clerk methodically punched out the wager, Mallory studied the odds arrayed in kino-bits above and behind the glossy faux-marble of the papier-mache counter. The French were heavily favored, he saw, with the Vulcan of the Compagnie Generate de Traction, the driver one M. Raynal. He noted that the Italian entry was in little better position than Godwin's Zephyr. Word of the try-rods?

The clerk passed Mallory a flimsy blue copy of the card he'd punched. Very good, sir, thank you. He was already looking past Mallory to the next customer.

Mallory spoke up. Will you accept a check drawn on a City bank?

Certainly, sir, the clerk replied, raising one eyebrow as if noticing Mallory's cap and coat for the first time, provided they are imprinted with your citizen-number.

In that case, Mallory said, to his own amazement, I shall wager an additional forty pounds on the Zephyr.

To win, sir?

To win.


Mallory fancied himself a rather keen observer of his fellow man. He possessed, Gideon Mantell had long ago assured him, the naturalist's requisite eye. Indeed, he owed his current position in the scientific hierarchy to having used that eye along a monotonous stretch of rock-strewn Wyoming riverbank, distinguishing form amid apparent chaos.

Now, however, appalled by the recklessness of his wager, by the enormity of the result in the event of his losing, Mallory found no comfort in the presence and variety of the Derby crowd. The eager roaring of massed and passionate greed, as the horses ran their course, was more than he could bear.

He left the stands, almost fleeing, hoping to shake the nervous energy from his legs. A dense mass of vehicles and people had congregated on the rails of the run-in, shrieking their enthusiasm as the horses passed in a cloud of dust. The poorer folk, these, mostly those unwilling to put down a shilling fee for admission to the stands, mixed with those who entertained or preyed upon the crowd thimble-riggers, gypsies, pick-pockets. He began shoving his way through toward the outskirts of the crowd, where he might catch his breath.

It occurred to Mallory suddenly that he might have lost one of his betting-slips. The thought almost paralyzed him. He stopped dead, his hands diving into his pockets.

No—the blue flimsies were still there, his tickets to disaster

He was almost trampled by a jostling pair of horses. Shocked and angered, Mallory grabbed at the harness of the nearer horse, caught his balance, shouted a warning.

A whip cracked near his head. The driver was trying to fight his way free of the entangling crowd, standing on the box of an open brougham. The fellow was a race-track dandy, gotten up in a suit of the most artificial blue, with a great paste ruby glinting in a cravat of lurid silk. Beneath the pallor of a swelling forehead, accentuated by dark disheveled locks, his bright gaunt eyes moved constantly, so that he seemed to be looking everywhere at once—except at the race-course, which still compelled the attention of everyone, save himself and Mallory. A queer fellow, and part of a queerer trio, for the passengers within the brougham were a pair of women.

One, veiled, wore a dark, almost masculine dress; and as the brougham halted she rose unsteadily and groped for its door. She tried to step free, with a drunken wobble, her hands encumbered by a long wooden box, something like an instrument-case. But the second woman made a violent grab for her veiled companion, yanking the gentlewoman back into her seat.

Mallory, still holding the leather harness, stared in astonishment. The second woman was a red-haired tart, in the flash garments appropriate to a gin-palace or worse. Her painted, pretty features were marked with a look of grim and utter determination.

Mallory saw the red-haired tart strike the veiled gentlewoman. It was a blow both calculated and covert, jabbing her doubled knuckles into the woman's short ribs with a practiced viciousness. The veiled woman doubled over and collapsed back into her seat.

Mallory was stung into immediate action. He dashed to the side of the brougham and yanked open the lacquered door. What is the meaning of this? he shouted.

Go away, the tart suggested.

I saw you strike this lady. How dare you?

The brougham lurched back into motion, almost knocking Mallory from his feet. Mallory recovered swiftly, dashed forward, seized the gentlewoman's arm. Stop at once!

The gentlewoman rose again to her feet. Beneath the black veil her rounded, gentle face was slack and dreamy. She tried to step free again, seeming unaware that the carriage was in motion. She could not get her balance. With a quite natural, ladylike gesture, she handed Mallory the long wooden box.

Mallory stumbled, clutching the ungainly case with both hands. Shouts arose from the milling crowd, for the tout's careless driving had infuriated them. The carriage rattled to a halt again, the horses snorting and beginning to plunge.

The driver, shaking with rage, tossed his whip aside and leapt free. He marched on Mallory, shoving by-standers aside. He whipped a pair of squarish, rose-tinted spectacles from his pocket, and slipped them over the pomaded hair at his ears. Halting before Mallory, he squared his sloping shoulders and extended one canary-gloved hand with a peremptory gesture.

Return that property at once, he commanded.

What is this about? Mallory countered.

I'll have that box now, or it will be the worse for you.

Mallory stared down at the little man, quite astonished at this bold threat. He almost laughed aloud, and would have done so, save that the fellow's darting eyes behind the square spectacles had a maddened gleam, like a laudanum fiend's.

Mallory set the case deliberately between his muddied boots. Madame, he called, step free, if you will. These people have no right to compel you—

The tout reached swiftly within his gaudy blue coat and lunged forward like a jack-in-the-box. Mallory fended him off with an open-handed push, and felt a stinging jolt tear at his left leg.

The tout half-stumbled, caught himself, leapt forward again with a snarl. There was a narrow gleam of steel in his hand.

Mallory was a practicing disciple of Mr. Shillingford's system of scientific boxing. In London, he sparred weekly in one of the private gymnasia maintained by the Royal Society, and his months in the wilds of North America had served as an introduction to the roughest sort of scrapping.

Mallory parried the man's knife-arm with the edge of his own left arm and drove his right fist against the fellow's mouth.

He had a brief glimpse of the stiletto, fallen on the trampled turf a viciously narrow double-edged blade, the handle of black gutta-percha. Then the man was upon him, bleeding from the mouth. There was no method whatever to the attack. Mallory assumed Shillingford's First Stance and had at the villain's head.


Now the crowd, which had drawn back from the initial exchange and the flash of steel, closed around the two, the innermost ring consisting of working-men and the race-course types who preyed on them. They were a burly, hooting lot, delighted to see a bit of claret spilt in unexpected circumstances. When Mallory took his man fair upon the chin with one of his best, they cheered, caught the fellow as he fell in their midst, and hurled him back, square into the next blow. The dandy went down, the salmon silk of his cravat dashed with blood.

I'll destroy you! he said from the ground. One of his teeth—the eye-tooth by the look of it—had been bloodily shattered.

Look out! someone shouted. Mallory turned at the cry. The red-haired woman stood behind him, her eyes demonic, something glinting in her hand—it seemed to be a glass vial, odd as that was. Her eyes darted downward—but Mallory stepped prudently between her and the long wooden box. There followed a moment's tense stand-off, while the tart seemed to weigh her alternatives—then she rushed to the side of the stricken tout.

I'll destroy you utterly! the tout repeated through bloodied lips. The woman helped him to his feet. The crowd jeered at him for a coward and empty braggart.

Try it, Mallory suggested, shaking his fist.

The tout's eyes met his in reptilian fury, as the man leaned heavily on his woman; then the two of them were gone, stumbling into the throng. Mallory snatched up the box triumphantly, turned and shoved his way through the laughing ring of men. One of them clapped him heartily on the back. He made for the abandoned brougham.

He pulled himself up and inside, into worn velvet and leather. The noise of the crowd was dying down; the race was over; someone had won.

The gentlewoman sat slumped in the shabby seat, her breath stirring the veil. Mallory looked quickly about for possible attackers, but saw only the crowd; saw it all in a most curious way, as if the instant were frozen, daguerreotyped by some fabulous process that captured every least shade of the spectrum.

Where is my chaperone? the woman asked, in a quiet, distracted voice.

And who might your chaperone be, madame? Mallory said, a bit dizzily. I don't think your friends were any proper sort of escort for a lady 

Mallory was bleeding from the wound in his left thigh; it was seeping through his trouser-leg. He sat heavily in the worn plush of the seat, pressed his palm against his wounded leg, and peered into the woman's veil. Elaborate ringlets, pale and seeming shot with grey, showed the sustained attentions of a gifted lady's-maid. But the face seemed to possess a strange familiarity.

Do I know you, madame? Mallory asked.

There was no answer.

May I escort you? he suggested. Do you have any proper friends at the Derby, madame? Someone to look after you?

The Royal Enclosure, she murmured.

You desire to go to the Royal Enclosure? The idea of troubling the Royal Family with this dazed mad-woman was rather more than Mallory was willing to countenance. Then it struck him that it would be a very simple matter to find police there; and this was a police business of some kind, without a doubt.

Humoring the unhappy woman would be his simplest course of action. Very well, ma'am, he said. He tucked the wooden box under one arm and offered her his other elbow. We shall proceed at once to the Royal Enclosure. If you would come with me, please.

Mallory led her toward the stands, through a torrent of people, limping a bit. As they walked, she seemed to recover herself somewhat. Her gloved hand rested on his forearm as lightly as a cobweb.

Mallory waited for a break in the hubbub. He found one at last beneath the whiled pillars of the stands. May I introduce myself, ma'am? My name is Edward Mallory. I am a Fellow of the Royal Society; a paleontologist.

The Royal Society, the woman muttered absently, her veiled head nodding like a flower on a stalk. She seemed to murmur something further.

I beg your pardon?

The Royal Society! We have sucked the life-blood from the mysteries of the universe 

Mallory stared.

The fundamental relations in the science of harmony, the woman continued, in a voice of deep gentility, great weariness, and profound calm, are susceptible to mechanical expression, allowing the composition of elaborate and scientific pieces of music, of any degree of complexity or extent.

To be sure, Mallory soothed.

I think, gentlemen, the woman whispered, that when you see certain productions of mine, you will not despair of me! In their own way, my marshaled regiments shall ably serve the rulers of the earth. And of what materials shall my regiments consist? Vast numbers.

She had seized Mallory's arm with feverish intensity.

We shall march in irresistible power to the sound of music. She turned her veiled face to him, with a queer sprightly earnestness. Is not this very mysterious? Certainly my troops must consist of numbers or they can have no existence at all. But then, what are these numbers? There is a riddle 

Is this your box, ma'am? Mallory said, offering it to her, hoping to spark some return to sense.

She looked at the box, without apparent recognition. It was a handsome thing of polished rosewood, its corners bound in brass; it might have been a lady's glove-box, but it was too stark, and lacked elegance. The long lid was latched shut by a pair of tiny brass hooks. She reached out to stroke it with a gloved forefinger, as if assuring herself of its physical existence. Something about it seemed to sting her into a dawning recognition of her own distress. Will you hold it for me, sir? she asked Mallory at last, her quiet voice trembling with a strange, piteous appeal. Will you hold it for me in safe-keeping?

Of course! Mallory said, touched despite himself. Of course I will hold it for you; as long as you like, madame.

They worked their way slowly up the stands to the carpeted stairs that led to the Royal Enclosure. Mallory's leg smarted sharply, and his trouser was sticky with blood. He was dizzier than he felt he should have been from such a minor wound; something about the woman's queer speech and odder demeanor had turned his head. Or perhaps—the dark thought occurred to him—there had been some sort of venom coating the tout's stiletto. He was sorry now that he had not snatched up the stiletto for a later analysis. Perhaps the mad-woman too had been somehow narcotized; likely he had foiled some dark plot of abduction

Below them, the track had been cleared for the coming gurney-race. Five massive gurneys—and the tiny, bauble-like Zephyr—were taking their places. Mallory paused a moment, torn, contemplating the frail craft upon which his fortunes now so absurdly hinged. The woman took that moment to release his arm and hasten toward the white-washed walls of the Royal Box.

Mallory, surprised, hurried after her, limping. She paused for a moment beside a pair of guards at the door—plain-clothes policemen, it seemed, very tall and fit. The woman brushed aside her veil, with a swift gesture of habit, and Mallory caught his first proper glimpse of her face.

She was Ada Byron, the daughter of the Prime Minister. Lady Ada Byron, the Queen of Engines.

She slipped through the door, beyond the guards, without so much as a glance behind her, or a single word of thanks. Mallory, lugging the rosewood box, hurried after her at once. Wait! he cried. Your Ladyship!

Just a moment, sir! the larger policeman said, quite politely. He held up a beefy hand, looked Mallory up and down, noting the wooden case, the dampened trouser-leg. His mustached mouth quirked. Are you a guest in the Royal Enclosure, sir?

No, Mallory said. But you must have seen Lady Ada step through here a moment ago. Something quite dreadful has happened to her; I'm afraid she's in some distress. I was able to be of some assistance—

Your name, sir? barked the second policeman.

Edward Miller, Mallory blurted, a sudden chill of protective suspicion striking him at the last instant.

May I see your citizen-card, Mr. Miller? said the first policeman. What's in that box you carry? May I look inside it, please?

Mallory swung the box away, took a step back. The policeman stared at him with a volatile mix of disdain and suspicion.

There was a loud report from the track below. Steam whistled from a ruptured seam in the Italian gurney, fogging out across the stands like a geyser. There was some small panic in the stands. Mallory seized this opportunity to hobble off; the policemen, worried perhaps about the safety of their post, did not choose to pursue him.

He hurried, limping, down the stands, losing himself as soon as possible amid the crowd. Some notion of self-preservation caused him to snatch his striped engineer's cap from his head and shove it in the pocket of his coat.

He found a place in the stands, many yards from the Royal Enclosure. He balanced the brass-bound box across his knees. There was a trifling rip in his trouser-leg, but the wound beneath it was still oozing. Mallory grimaced in confusion as he sat, and pressed the palm of his hand against the aching wound.

Damme, said a man on the bench behind him, his voice thick with self-assurance and drink. This false start will take the pressure down. Simple matter of specific heat. It means the biggest boiler wins surely.

Which one's that, then? said the man's companion, perhaps his son.

The man ruffled through a racing tip-sheet. That'll be the Goliath. Lord Hansell's racer. Her sister-craft won last year 

Mallory looked down upon the hoof-beaten track. The driver of the Italian racer was being carried off on a stretcher, having been extricated with some difficulty from the cramped confines of his pilot's station. A column of dirty steam still rose from the rent in the Italian boiler. Racing-attendants hitched a team of horses to the disabled hulk.

Tall white gouts rose briskly from the stacks of the other racers. The crenellations of polished brass crowning the stack of the Goliath were especially impressive. It utterly dwarfed the slender, peculiarly delicate stack of Godwin's Zephyr, braced with guy-wires, which repeated in cross-section the teardrop formula of line-streaming.

A terrible business! opined the younger man. I do believe the burst took that poor foreigner's head clean off, quite.

Not a bit of it, said the older man. Fellow had a fancy helmet.

He's not moving, sir.

If the Italians can't compete properly in the technical arena, they've no business here, the older man said sternly.

A roar of appreciation came from the crowd as the disabled steamer was hauled free by the laboring horses. We'll see some proper sport now! said the older man.

Mallory, waiting tensely, found himself opening the rosewood box, his thumbs moving on the little brass catches as if by their own volition. The interior, lined with green baize, held a long stack of milky-white cards. He plucked one free from the middle of the stack. It was an Engine punch-card, cut to a French specialty-gauge, and made of some bafflingly smooth artificial material. One corner bore the handwritten annotation #154, faint mauve ink.

Mallory tucked the card carefully back into place and shut the box.

A flag was waved and the gurneys were off.

The Goliath and the French Vulcan lurched at once into the lead. The unaccustomed delay—the fatal delay. Mallory thought, his heart crushed within him—had cooled the tiny boiler of the Zephyr, leading no doubt to a vital loss of impetus. The Zephyr rolled in the wake of the greater machines, bumping half-comically in their deep-gouged tracks. It could not seem to get a proper traction.

Mallory did not find himself surprised. He was full of fatal resignation.

Vulcan and Goliath began to jostle for position at the first turn. The three other gurneys fell into file behind them. The Zephyr, quite absurdly, took the widest possible turn, far outside the tracks of the other craft. Master second-degree Henry Chesterton, at the wheel of the tiny craft, seemed to have gone quite mad. Mallory watched with the numb calm of a ruined man.

The Zephyr lurched into an impossible burst of speed. It slipped past the other gurneys with absurd, buttery ease, like a slimy pumpkin-seed squeezed between thumb and forefinger. At the half-mile turn, its velocity quite astonishing, it teetered visibly onto two wheels; at the final lap, it struck a slight rise, the entire vehicle becoming visibly airborne. The great driving-wheels rebounded from earth with a gout of dust and a metallic screech; it was only at that moment that Mallory realized that the great crowd in the stands had fallen into deathly silence.

Not a peep rose from them as the Zephyr whizzed across the finish-line. It slithered to a halt then, bumping violently across the gouged tracks left by the competition.

A full four seconds passed before the stunned track-man managed to wave his flag. The other gurneys were still rounding a distant bend a full hundred yards behind.

The crowd suddenly burst into astonished outcry—not joy so much as utter disbelief, and even a queer sort of anger.

Henry Chesterton stepped from the Zephyr. He tossed back a neck-scarf, leaned at his ease against the shining hull of his craft, and watched with cool insolence as the other gurneys labored painfully across the finish line. By the time they arrived, they seemed to have aged centuries. They were, Mallory realized, relics.

Mallory reached into his pocket. The blue slips of betting-paper were utterly safe. Their material nature had not changed in the slightest, but now these little blue slips infallibly signified the winning of four hundred pounds. No, five hundred pounds in all—fifty of that to be given to the utterly victorious Mr. Michael Godwin.

Mallory heard a voice ring in his ears, amid the growing tumult of the crowd. I'm rich, the voice remarked calmly. It was his own voice.

He was rich.


This image is a formal daguerreotype of the sort distributed by the British aristocracy among narrow circles of friendship and acquaintance. The photographer may have been Albert, the Prince Consort, a man whose much-publicized interest in scientific matters had made him an apparently genuine intimate of Britain's Radical elite. The dimensions of the room, and the rich drapery of its back-drop, strongly suggest the photographing salon that Prince Albert maintained at Windsor Palace.

The women depicted are Lady Ada Byron and her companion and soi-disant chaperone. Lady Mary Somerville. Lady Somerville, the authoress of 'On the Connection of the Physical Sciences' and the translator of Laplace's 'Celestial Mechanics', has the resigned look of a woman accustomed to the vagaries of her younger companion. Both women wear gilded sandals, and white draperies, somewhat akin to a Greek toga, but strongly influenced by French neoclassicism. They are, in fact, the garments of female adepts of the Society of Light, the secret inner body and international propaganda arm of the Industrial Radical Party. The elderly Mrs. Somerville also wears a fillet of bronze marked with astronomical symbols, a covert symbol of the high post this femme savante occupies in the councils of European science.

Lady Ada, her arms bare save for a signet-ring on her right forefinger, places a laurel wreath about the brow of a marble bust of Isaac Newton. Despite the careful placement of the camera, the strange garb does not flatter Lady Ada, and her face shows stress. Lady Ada was forty-one years old in late June 1855, when this daguerreotype was taken. She had recently lost a large sum of money at the Derby, though her gambling-losses, common knowledge among her intimates, seem to have covered the loss of even larger sums, most likely extorted from her.

She is the Queen of Engines, the Enchantress of Number. Lord Babbage called her Little Da. She has no formal role in government, and the brief flowering of her mathematical genius is far behind her. But she is, perhaps, the foremost link between her father, the Great Orator of the Industrial Radical Party, and Charles Babbage, the Party's grey eminence and foremost social theorist.

Ada is the mother.

Her thoughts are closed.



THIRD ITERATION

Dark-Lanterns

Picture Edward Mallory ascending the splendid central staircase in the Palace of Paleontology, its massive ebony railing supported by a black-enameled ironwork depicting ancient ferns, cycads, and ginkgoes.

Say that he is followed by a red-faced bellman burdened with a dozen glossy parcels, fruit of a long afternoon's careful, methodical shopping. As Mallory climbs, he sees that Lord Owen is heaving his massive way down the stairs, a peevish look in his rheumy eyes. The eyes of the distinguished reptile anatomist resemble shelled oysters, Mallory thinks, peeled and propped for dissection. Mallory doffs his hat. Owen mutters something that might be a greeting.

At the turn of the first broad landing. Mallory glimpses a group of students seated by the open windows, quietly debating, while twilight settles over the crouching plaster behemoths of the Palace's rock gardens.

A breeze disturbs the long linen curtains.


Mallory turned, right-face, left-face, before the wardrobe mirror. Unbuttoning the coat, he thrust his hands into the trouser-pockets, the better to display the waistcoat, which was woven in a dizzy mosaic of tiny blue-and-white squares. Ada Checkers, the tailors called them, the Lady having created the pattern by programming a Jacquard loom to weave pure algebra. The waistcoat carried off the whole business, he thought, though still it needed something, perhaps a cane. Flicking the hinge of his cigar-case, he offered a prime Havana to the gent in the mirror. A fine gesture but one couldn't carry a silver cigar-case about like a lady's muff; that was a faggot-above-a-load, surely.

A sharp metallic tapping issued from the speaking-tube set into the wall beside the door. Crossing the room, he flicked open the rubber-lined brass lid. Mallory here! he bellowed, bending. The desk-clerk's voice rose up, a distant hollow-throated ghostliness. Visitor for you. Dr. Mallory! Shall I send up his card?

Yes, please! Mallory, unaccustomed to closing the pneumatic grate, fumbled at the gilt-tin clasp. A cylinder of black gutta-percha shot from the tube as if fired from a gun, impacting solidly against the wall opposite. Hastening to fetch it, Mallory noted without surprise that the papered plaster wall there was already peppered with dents. He unscrewed the lid of the cylinder and shook out its contents. Mr. Laurence Oliphant, on lavish cream-laid card-stock, Author and Journalist. A Piccadilly address and a telegram-number. A journalist of some pretensions, to judge by his card. Vaguely familiar name. Hadn't he read something by an Oliphant in Blackwood's? Turning the card over, he examined the Engine-stippled portrait of a pale-haired gentleman gone balding in front. Large brown spaniel eyes, a quizzical half-smile, a draggle of beard beneath the chin. With the beard and the baldness, Mr. Oliphant's narrow skull looked as long as an Iguanodon's.

Mallory tucked the card into his notebook and glanced about his room. His bed was littered with the truck of his shopping charge-slips, tissue-paper, glove-boxes, shoe-lasts.

Please tell Mr. Oliphant I'll meet him in the lobby! Quickly filling the pockets of his new trousers, he let himself out, locking the door, and strode down the hall, past white walls of pocked and dotted fossil limestone framed by sweating columns of square dark marble, his new shoes squeaking with his every step.


Mr. Oliphant, unexpectedly long of limb, and most neatly but sumptuously dressed, reclined against the front desk, his back to the clerk. With elbows resting against the marble counter-top, and feet crossed at the ankles, the journalist's ramshackle pose conveyed the gentleman sportsman's easy indolence. Mallory, having met more than his share of gin-and-water reporters, hacks pursuing wide-eyed articles on the great Leviathan, registered a faint twinge of anxiety; this fellow evinced the smooth self-possession of the extremely well-advantaged.

Mallory introduced himself, discovering a sinewy strength in the journalist's long-fingered hand.

I'm on the business of the Geographical Society, Oliphant announced, loudly enough to be overheard by a nearby group of loitering savants. Exploration Committee, you see. Wondered if I mightn't consult you on a certain matter. Dr. Mallory.

Of course, Mallory said. The Royal Geographical Society was lavishly funded; its powerful Exploration Committee decided upon the recipients of the Geographical's grants.

May I suggest we speak in private, sir?

Surely, Mallory agreed, and followed the journalist into the Palace's saloon, where Oliphant found a quiet corner half-shadowed by a lacquered Chinese screen. Mallory threw back his coat-tails and took a chair. Oliphant perched at the far end of a red silk couch, his back to the wall. He gazed limpidly down the length of the saloon, and Mallory saw that he was checking for eavesdroppers.

You seem to know the Palace well, Mallory ventured. Are you often here, on your Committee's work?

Not frequently, no, though I once met a colleague of yours here, a Professor Francis Rudwick.

Ah, Rudwick, yes; poor chap. Mallory was nettled a bit, but not surprised, to meet a professional connection of Rudwick's. Rudwick had rarely missed a chance to scruffle grant-money, from whatever source.

Oliphant nodded soberly. I'm no savant, Dr. Mallory. I'm a writer of travel-books, actually. Trifles, really, though some have met with a degree of public favor.

I see, Mallory said, convinced he'd the fellow's number now wealthy idler, dilettante. Very likely he'd family connections. Most such eager dabblers were quite worthless to Science.

Within the Geographical, Dr. Mallory, Oliphant began, there presently exists intense debate as to our proper subject-matter. You are, perhaps, aware of the controversy?

I've been overseas, Mallory said, and have missed a deal of news.

No doubt you've been fully occupied with your own scientific controversy. Oliphant's smile was disarming. Catastrophe versus Uniformity. Rudwick spoke of the matter often. Quite fiercely, I must say.

A difficult business, Mallory muttered, rather abstruse 

I personally found Rudwick's argument weak, Oliphant said offhandedly, to Mallory's pleasant surprise. The journalist leaned forward, with flattering attention. Permit me to further explain the purpose of my visit, Dr. Mallory. Within the Geographical, some consider that the Society might be better advised, rather than plunging into Africa to discover the sources of the Nile, to investigate the sources of our own society. Why confine exploration to physical geography, when there are so many problems of political, and indeed moral, geography, problems as yet unsolved?

Interesting, Mallory said, quite at a loss as to what his visitor might be getting at.

As a prominent explorer, Oliphant said, what might you say to a proposition of the following sort? The man's gaze, curiously, seemed fixed now on the middle distance. Suppose, sir, that one were to explore not the vastness of Wyoming but a specific corner of our own London 

Mallory nodded meaninglessly, and briefly entertained the possibility that Oliphant was mad.

Mightn't we then, sir, the man continued, with a slight shiver, as of suppressed enthusiasm, make utterly objective, entirely statistical investigations? Mightn't we examine society, sir, with a wholly novel precision and intensity? Divining, thereby, new principles—from the myriad clusterings of population over time, sir; from the most obscure travels of currency from hand to hand; from the turbulent flows of traffic Topics we now vaguely call police matters, health matters, public services—but perceived, sir, as by an all-searching, an all-pervasive, a scientific eye!

There was far too much of the enthusiast's gleam in Oliphant's gaze, a sudden fierce kindling that showed his air of languor as a sham.

In theory, Mallory hedged, the prospect seems promising. As a practical matter, I doubt that the scientific societies could provide the Engine-resources necessary to such a broad and ambitious project. I myself have had to struggle to arrange a simple stress-analysis of the bones I've discovered. Engine-work is in constant demand. In any case, why should the Geographical Society tackle this matter? Why take funding from necessary foreign exploration-work? I should think perhaps a direct Parliamentary inquiry 

But Government lack the vision necessary, the sense of intellectual adventure, the objectivity. Suppose it were the Engines of the police, though, instead of those of, say, the Cambridge Institute. What would you say then?

The Engines of the police? Mallory said. The idea was quite extraordinary. How should the police agree to a loan of their Engines?

The Engines are frequently idle at night, Oliphant said.

Are they, really? Mallory said. My word, that is interesting But if those Engines were put to the use of Science, Mr. Oliphant, I imagine other, more urgent projects would quickly consume the idle spinning-time. A proposal like yours would need powerful backing to make its way to the front of the queue.

But, in theory, you do agree? Oliphant persisted. If the resources were available, you'd find the basic tenet worthy?

I would have to see a detailed proposal before I could actively support such a project, and I frankly doubt my voice would carry much weight in your Geographical Society. I'm not a Fellow there, you know.

You underestimate your growing fame, Oliphant protested. The nomination of Edward Mallory—discoverer of the Land Leviathan—would carry the Geographical with great ease.

Mallory was speechless.

Rudwick became a Fellow, Oliphant said smoothly. After the pterodactyl business.

Mallory cleared his throat. I'm sure it's a worthy—

I shall consider it an honor if you will let me see to the matter personally, Oliphant said. There will be no difficulty, I can promise you.

Oliphant's air of assurance brooked no doubt. Mallory recognized the fait accompli. He had been neatly maneuvered. There was no graceful way to refuse the favor, and a Fellowship in the wealthy and powerful Geographical was certainly not to be scorned. It would be a professional boon. He could see the Fellowship in his mind's eye, tacked to his name Mallory, F.R.S., F.R.G.S. The honor is all mine, sir, Mallory said, though I fear you too much trouble yourself on my account.

I take a profound interest in paleontology, sir.

I'm surprised that a writer of travel-books would take such an interest.

Oliphant steepled his elegant fingers and brought them to his long, bare upper-lip. I have found. Dr. Mallory, that 'journalist' is a usefully vague term, allowing one to make any number of odd inquiries. By nature, I am a man of broad but woefully shallow curiosity. Oliphant spread his hands. I do what I can to be useful to true scholars, though I doubt I fully deserve my present unsought role in the inner circle of the august Geographical. Overnight fame has peculiar repercussions, you see.

I must confess I'm not familiar with your books, Mallory said. I've been overseas, and far behind in my reading. I take it you hit the public mark, then, and had a great success?

Not the books, Oliphant said, with surprised amusement. I was involved in the Tokyo Legation affair. In Japan. Late last year.

An outrage against our embassy in Japan, am I correct? A diplomat was injured? I was in America

Oliphant hesitated, then bent his left arm, tugging back coat-sleeve and immaculate cuff to reveal a puckered red scar at the outer joint of his left wrist. A knife-slash. No, worse than that a saber-blow, into the tendons. Mallory noticed for the first time that two of the fingers on Oliphant's left hand were permanently bent.

You, then! Laurence Oliphant, the hero of the Tokyo Legation! Now I remember the name. Mallory stroked his beard. You should have put that upon your card, sir, and I would have recalled you instantly.

Oliphant worked his sleeve back, looking mildly embarrassed. A Japanese sword-wound makes so odd a carte d'identite 

Your interests are varied indeed, sir.

Sometimes one can't avoid certain entanglements, Dr. Mallory. In the interests of the nation, as it were. I think you yourself know that situation very well.

I'm afraid I don't follow you 

Professor Rudwick, the late Professor Rudwick, certainly knew of such entanglements.

Mallory now grasped the nature of Oliphant's allusion. He spoke up roughly. Your card, sir, declares you a journalist. These are not matters one discusses with a journalist.

Your secret, I fear, is far from hermetic, said Oliphant, with polite disdain. Every member of your Wyoming expedition knows the truth. Fifteen men, some less discreet than one might hope. Rudwick's men knew of his covert activities as well. Those who arranged the business, who asked you to carry out their scheme, know as well.

And how, sir, do you know?

I've investigated Rudwick's murder.

You think Rudwick's death was linked to his American activities?

I know that to be the case.

Before we go any further, I must be sure where we stand, Mr. Oliphant. When you say 'activities,' what exactly do you mean? Speak plain, sir. Define your terms.

Very well. Oliphant looked pained. I refer to the official body that persuaded you to smuggle repeating rifles to the American savages.

And the name of this body?

The Royal Society's Commission on Free Trade, Oliphant said patiently. They exist—officially—to study international trade-relations. Tariffs, investments, and so forth. Their ambition, I fear, over-reaches that authority.

The Commission on Free Trade is a legitimate branch of Government.

In the realm of diplomacy. Dr. Mallory, your actions might be construed as clandestinely arming the enemies of nations with whom Britain is not officially at war.

And shall I conclude, Mallory began angrily, that you take a very dim view of—

Gun-running. Though it has its place in the world, make no mistake. Oliphant was watching for eavesdroppers again. But it must never be undertaken by self-appointed zealots with an overweening notion of their role in foreign policy.

You don't care for amateurs in the game, then?

Oliphant met Mallory's eye, but said nothing.

You want professionals, then, Mr. Oliphant? Men like yourself?

Oliphant leaned forward, elbows on his knees. A professional agency, he said precisely, would not abandon its men to be eviscerated by foreign agents in the very heart of London, Dr. Mallory. And that, sir, I must inform you, is very near the position you find yourself in today. The Commission on Free Trade will help you no longer, however thoroughly you've done their work. They have not even informed you of the threat to your life. Am I wrong, sir?

Francis Rudwick died in a brawl in a ratting-den. And that was months ago.

It was last January—five months only. Rudwick had returned from Texas, where he had been secretly arming the Comanche tribe with rifles supplied by your Commission. On the night of Rudwick's murder, someone attempted to take the life of the former President of Texas. President Houston very narrowly escaped. His secretary, a British citizen, was brutally knifed to death. The murderer is still very much at large.

You think a Texian killed Rudwick, then?

I think it almost certain. Rudwick's activities may be poorly known here in London, but they're quite obvious to the unhappy Texians, who regularly extract British bullets from the corpses of their fellows.

I dislike the way you paint the business, Mallory said, with a slow prickle of anger. If we hadn't given them guns, they wouldn't have helped us. We might have dug for years, if it weren't for Cheyenne help 

I doubt one could make that case to a Texas Ranger, Oliphant said. For that matter, I doubt one could make it to the popular press 

I've no intention of speaking to the press. I regret having spoken with you. Clearly you're no friend of the Commission.

I already know far more about the Commission than I should have cared to discover. I came here to convey a warning, Dr. Mallory, not to request information. It is I who have spoken too openly—have been forced to do so, since the Commission's blundering has very obviously endangered your life, sir.

There was force in the argument. A point well taken, Mallory admitted. You have warned me, sir, and I thank you for that. He thought for a moment. But what of the Geographical Society, Mr. Oliphant? What is their place in this?

An alert and observant traveler may serve his nation's interests with no prejudice to Science, Oliphant said. The Geographical has long been a vital source of intelligence. Map-making, naval routes

Mallory pounced. You don't call them 'amateurs', then, Mr. Oliphant? Though they too muck about with dark-lanterns, where they oughtn't?

A silence stretched. They're our amateurs, Oliphant said dryly.

But what, precisely, is the difference?

The precise difference. Dr. Mallory, is that the Commission's amateurs are being murdered.

Mallory grunted. He leaned back in the chair. Perhaps there was real substance to Oliphant's dark theory. The sudden death of Rudwick, his rival, his most formidable enemy, had always seemed too convenient a stroke of fortune. What does he look like, then, this Texian assassin of yours?

He is described as tall, dark-haired, and powerfully built. He wears a broad-brimmed hat and a long pale greatcoat.

He wouldn't be a ratty little race-track swell with a protruding forehead—Mallory touched his temple—and a stiletto in his pocket?

Oliphant's eyes widened. Dear heaven, he said softly.

Suddenly Mallory found he was enjoying himself. Discomfiting the suave spy had touched some deep vein of satisfaction. Had a nick at me, this feller, Mallory said, in his broadest Sussex drawl. Derby Day, at the races. Uncommon nasty little rascal 

What happened?

I knocked the scoundrel down, Mallory said.

Oliphant stared at him, then burst into laughter. You're a man of unexpected resources. Dr. Mallory.

I might say the same of you, sir. Mallory paused. I have to tell you, though, I don't believe the man was after me. He'd a girl with him, a track-dolly, the two of them bullying a lady—

Do go on, Oliphant urged, this is uncommonly interesting.

I'm afraid I can't, Mallory said. The lady in question was a personage. 

Your discretion, sir, Oliphant said evenly, does you credit as a gentleman. A knife-attack, however, is a serious crime. Have you not informed the police?

No, Mallory said, savoring Oliphant's contained agitation, the lady again, you see. I feared to compromise her.

Perhaps, Oliphant suggested, it was all a charade, calculated to involve you in a supposed gambling-brawl. Something similar was worked on Rudwick—who died, you well recall, in a ratting-den.

Sir, Mallory said, the lady was none other than Ada Byron.

Oliphant stiffened. The Prime Minister's daughter?

There is no other.

Indubitably, Oliphant said, a sudden brittle lightness in his tone. It does strike me, though, that there are any number of women who resemble Lady Ada, our Queen of Engines being a queen of fashion as well. Thousands of women follow her mode.

I've never been introduced, Mr. Oliphant, but I've seen her in Royal Society sessions. I've heard her lecture on Engine mathematics. I am not mistaken.

Oliphant took a leather notebook from his jacket, propped it against one knee, and uncapped a reservoir-pen. Tell me, please, about this incident.

In strictest confidence?

You have my word.

Mallory presented a discreet version of the facts. He described Ada's tormentors, and the circumstances, to the best of his ability, but he made no mention of the wooden case with its French Engine-cards of camphorated cellulose. Mallory considered this a private matter between the Lady and himself; she had burdened him with the guardianship of this strange object of hers, and he regarded this as a sacred obligation. The wooden case of cards, carefully wrapped in white specimen-linen, lay hidden among the plastered fossils in one of Mallory's private lockers at the Museum of Practical Geology, awaiting his further attention.

Oliphant closed his notebook, put away his pen, and signaled the waiter for drinks. The waiter, recognizing Mallory, brought him a huckle-buff. Oliphant had a pink gin.

I would like you to meet some friends of mine, Oliphant said. The Central Statistics Bureau maintain extensive files on the criminal classes—anthropometric measurements, Engine-portraits, and so forth. I should like you to try to identify your assailant and his female accomplice.

Very well, Mallory said.

You shall be assigned police protection, as well.

Protection?

Not a common policeman, of course. Someone from the Special Bureau. They are very discreet.

I can't have some copper tagging always at my heels, Mallory said. What would people say?

I worry rather more what they'll say if you were to be found gutted in some passage. Two prominent dinosaur-savants, the both of them mysteriously murdered? The press would run quite wild.

I need no guard. I'm not frightened of the little pimp.

He may well be unimportant. We shall at least know that, if you are able to identify him. Oliphant sighed delicately. No doubt it's all a very trumpery affair, according to the standards of Empire. But I should reckon it as including the command of money; the services, when needed, of that shady sort of Englishman, who lives in the byways of foreign life in London; and lastly, the secret sympathy of American refugees, fled here from the wars that convulse that continent.

And you imagine that Lady Ada has fallen somehow into this dire business?

No, sir, none of it. You may rest assured that that cannot possibly be the case. The woman you saw cannot have been Ada Byron.

Then I regard the matter as settled, Mallory said. If you were to tell me Lady Ada's interests were at hazard, I might agree to almost any measure. As things stand, I shall take my own chances.

The decision is entirely yours, of course, Oliphant said coolly. And perhaps it is still early in the game to take such stem measures. You have my card? Let me know how matters develop.

I will.

Oliphant stood. And remember, should anyone ask, that today we have discussed nothing more than the affairs of the Geographical Society.

You've yet to tell me the name of your own employers, Mr. Oliphant. Your true employers.

Oliphant somberly shook his long head. Such knowledge never profits, sir; there is nothing but grief in such questions. If you're wise, Dr. Mallory, you'll have nothing more to do with dark-lanterns. With luck, the whole affair will simply come to nothing, in the end, and will fade away, without trace, as a nightmare does. I shall certainly put your name forward for the Geographical, as I have promised, and I do hope that you will seriously consider my proposal regarding possible uses of the Bow Street Engines.

Mallory watched as this extraordinary personage rose, turned, and strode away, across the Palace's rich carpet, his long legs flashing like scissors.


Clutching his new valise with one hand, the overhead straps with another, Mallory inched his way along the crowded aisle of the omnibus to the rattling exit-platform. When the driver slowed for a filthy tarmac-wagon. Mallory jumped for the curb.

Despite his best efforts, Mallory had boarded the wrong 'bus. Or perhaps he had ridden too far on the correct vehicle, well past his destination, while engrossed in the latest number of the Westminster Review. He'd purchased the magazine because it carried an article of Oliphant's, a witty post-mortem on the conduct of the Crimean War. Oliphant, it developed, was something of an expert on the Crimean region, having published his The Russian Shores of the Black Sea a full year prior to the outbreak of hostilities. The book detailed a jolly but quite extensive Crimean holiday which Oliphant had undertaken. To Mallory's newly alerted eye, Oliphant's latest article bristled with sly insinuation.

A street-arab whipped with a broom of twigs at the pavement before Mallory's feet. The boy glanced up, puzzled. Pardon, guv? Mallory realized with an unhappy start that he had been talking to himself, standing there in rapt abstraction, muttering aloud over Oliphant's deviousness. The boy, grasping at Mallory's attention, did a back-somersault. Mallory tossed him tuppence, turned at random, and walked away, shortly discovering himself in Leicester Square, its gravel walks and formal gardens an excellent place to be robbed or ambushed. Especially at night, for the streets about featured theatres, pantos, and magic-lantern houses.

Crossing Whitcomb, then Oxenden, he found himself in Haymarket, strange in the broad summer daylight, its raucous whores absent now and sleeping. He walked the length of it, for curiosity's sake. It looked very different by day, shabby and tired of itself. At length, noting Mallory's pace, a pimp approached him, offering a packet of French-letters, sure armor against the lady's-fever.

Mallory bought them, dropping the packet into his valise.

Turning left, he marched into the chuffing racket of busy Pall Mall, the wide macadam lined by the black iron palings of exclusive clubs, their marbled fronts set well back from the street-jostle. Off Pall Mall, at the far end of Waterloo Place, stood the Duke of York's memorial. The Grand Old Duke of York, Who Had Ten Thousand Men, was a distant soot-blackened effigy now, his rotund column dwarfed by the steel-spired headquarters of the Royal Society.

Mallory had his bearings now. He tramped the elevated pedestrian-bridge, over Pall Mall, while below him sweating kerchief-headed navvies ripped at the intersection with a banging steel-armed excavator. They were preparing the foundation of a new monument, he saw, doubtless to the glory of the Crimean victory. He strode up Regent Street to the Circus, where the crowd poured endlessly forth from the underground's sooty marble exits. He allowed himself to be swept into swift currents of humanity.

There was a potent stench here, a cloacal reek, like burning vinegar, and for a moment Mallory imagined that this miasma emanated from the crowd itself, from the flapping crannies of their coats and shoes. It had a subterranean intensity, some fierce deep-buried chemistry of hot cinders and septic drippings, and now he realized that it must be pistoned out somehow, forced from the hot bowels of London by the charging trains below. Then he was being jostled up Jermyn Street, and in a moment he was smelling the heady wares of Paxton and Whitfield's cheese emporium. Hurrying across Duke Street, the stench forgotten, he paused below the wrought-iron lamps of the Cavendish Hotel, secured the fastenings of his valise, then crossed to his destination, the Museum of Practical Geology.

It was an imposing, sturdy, fortress-like edifice; Mallory thought it much like the mind of its Curator. He trotted up the steps into a welcome stony chill. Signing the leather-bound visitor's book with a flourish, he strode on, into the vast central hall, its walls lined with shining glass-fronted cabinets of rich mahogany. Light poured down from the great cupola of steel and glass, where a lone cleaner dangled now in his shackled harness, polishing one pane after another in what Mallory supposed would amount to an unending rota.

On the Museum's ground floor were displayed the Vertebrata, along with various pertinent illustrations of the marvels of stratigraphical geology. Above, in a railed and pillared gallery, were a series of smaller cabinets containing the Invertebrata. The day's crowd was of gratifying size, with surprising numbers of women and children, including an entire uniformed class of scruffy, working-class school-boys from some Government academy. They studied the cabinets with grave attention, aided by red-jacketed guides.

Mallory ducked through a tall, unmarked door and down a hall flanked by locked storerooms. At the hall's end, a single magisterial voice was audible through the closed door of the Curator's office. Mallory knocked, then listened, smiling, as the voice completed a particularly orotund rhetorical period. Enter, rang the voice of the Curator. Mallory stepped inside as Thomas Henry Huxley rose to greet him. They shook hands. Huxley had been dictating to his secretary, a bespectacled young man with the look of an ambitious graduate student. That will be all for now, Harris, Huxley said. Send in Mr. Reeks, please, with his sketches of the Brontosaurus.

The secretary tucked his penciled notes into a leather folio and left, with a bow to Mallory.

How've you been, Ned? Huxley looked Mallory up and down, with the narrow-set, pitilessly observant eyes that had discovered Huxley's Layer in the root of the human hair. You look very well indeed. One might even say splendid.

Had a bit of luck, Mallory said gruffly.

To Mallory's surprise, he saw a small, fair-haired boy, neatly dressed in a flat-collared suit and knee-breeches, emerge from behind Huxley's heaped desk. And who is this? Mallory said.

Futurity, Huxley quipped, bending to pick up the child. My son, Noel, come to help his father today. Say how-do-you-do to Dr. Mallory, son.

How do you do, Mr. Mellowy? the boy piped.

Doctor Mallory, Huxley corrected gently.

Noel's eyes widened. Are you a medical doctor, Mr. Mellowy? The thought clearly alarmed him.

Why, you could scarcely walk when last we met. Master Noel, Mallory boomed heartily. And here you are today, quite the little gentleman. He knew that Huxley doted on the child. How's your baby brother, then?

He has a sister now as well, Huxley announced, setting the boy down. Since you were in Wyoming.

You must be happy at that, Master Noel!

The little boy smiled briefly, with guarded politeness. He hopped up into his father's chair. Mallory set his valise atop a bookcase, which contained a morocco-bound set of the works of Cuvier in the original. I have an item that may interest you, Thomas, he said, opening his valise. A gift for you from the Cheyenne. Remembering to tuck the French-letters beneath the Westminster Review, he brought out a string-tied paper bundle and carried it to Huxley.

I hope this isn't one of those ethnographical curios, Huxley said, smiling, as he parted the string neatly with a paper-knife. I can't abide those wretched beads and what-not 

The paper held six shriveled brown wafers, the size of half-crowns.

A helpful bequest to you from a Cheyenne medicine man, Thomas.

Rather like our Anglican bishops, are they? Huxley smiled, holding one of the leathery objects to the light. Dried vegetable matter. A cactus?

I would think so.

Joseph Hooker of Kew could tell us.

This witch-doctor chap had a fair grasp of the purpose of our expedition. He fancied that we meant to re-vivify the dead monster, here in England. He said that these wafers would enable you to journey far, Thomas, and fetch back the creature's soul.

And what do I do, Ned, string them on a rosary?

No, Thomas, you eat them. You eat them, chant, beat drums, and dance like a dervish, until you fall down in a fit. That's the standard methodology, I take it. Mallory chuckled.

Certain vegetable toxins have the quality of producing visions, Huxley remarked, putting the wafers carefully away in a desk-drawer. Thank you, Ned. I'll see they're properly catalogued, later. I fear the pressure of business has confounded our Mr. Reeks. He is usually more prompt.

It's a good crowd out there, today, Mallory offered, to fill the silence. Huxley's boy had pulled a toffee from his pocket and was unwrapping it with surgical precision.

Yes, Huxley said, Britain's museums, our fortresses of intellect, as the RM. puts it in his eloquent way. Still, no use denying that education, mass education, is the single great work at hand. Though there are days when I would throw it all over, Ned, to be a field-man like yourself again.

You're needed here, Thomas.

So they tell me, Huxley said. I do try to get out, once a year. Wales, mostly tramp the hills. It restores the soul. He paused. Did you know I am up for a Lordship?

No! Mallory cried, delighted. Tom Huxley, a Lord! 'Struth! What splendid news.

Huxley looked unexpectedly morose. I saw Lord Forbes at the Royal Society. 'Well,' Forbes said, 'I am glad to tell you that you are all right for the House of Lords; the selection was made on Friday night, and I hear that you were one of those selected.'  Huxley, without apparent effort, had Forbes' gestures, his phrasing, even his tone of voice. He glanced up. I haven't seen the List, but the authority of Forbes is such that I feel somewhat assured.

Of course! Mallory exulted. A stout fellow, Forbes!

I shan't feel entirely certain until I receive official confirmation, Huxley said. I confess, Ned, to some anxiety about it, the health of the Prime Minister being what it is.

Yes, a pity he's ill, Mallory said. But why should that concern you so? Your accomplishments speak for themselves!

Huxley shook his head. The timing seems no accident. I suspect this is some ploy of Babbage and his elite cronies, a last attempt to pack the Lords with scientific savants while Byron still holds sway.

That's a dark suspicion, Mallory said. You were Evolution's greatest advocate in debate! Why question your good fortune? It seems to me a matter of simple justice!

Huxley grasped his own lapels, two-handed, a gesture of deep sincerity. Whether I have the Lordship or not, I can say one thing I have left my case to stand on its own strength. I have never asked for special favor. If the title is mine, it is not through any intrigue of my own.

Intrigue does not enter into it! Mallory said.

Of course it does! Huxley snapped. Though you'll not hear me say it publicly. He lowered his voice. But you and I have known each other many years now. I count you as an ally, Ned, and a friend of truth.

Huxley began to pace the Turkish carpet before his desk. It is no use, our having any false modesty about a matter so important. We have certain vital duties to perform; to ourselves, to the outside world, and to Science. We swallow praise, which is no great pleasure, and endure multitudinous difficulties, involving a good deal of unquestionable pain, pain and even danger.

Mallory was unsettled, taken aback both by the speed of the news and the sudden weight of Huxley's sincerity. Yet Huxley had always been like this, he thought; even as a young student, there had been a shock and an impetus to the man's company. For the first time since Canada, Mallory felt himself back in his true world, in the cleaner, higher plane that Huxley's mind inhabited. Danger of what kind? he asked belatedly.

Moral danger. Physical danger as well. There is always hazard in the struggle for worldly power. A Lordship is a political post. Party and Government, Ned. Money and law. Temptation, perhaps ignoble compromise The nation's resources are finite; competition is sharp. The niche of Science and Education must be defended; nay, expanded! Huxley smiled grimly. Somehow we must grasp the nettle. The alternative would be to lie still and let the devil have his way with the world to come. And I for one should rather burst to pieces, than see Science prostituted!

Startled by Huxley's bluntness, Mallory glanced at the little boy, who was sucking his toffee and kicking his bright shiny shoes against the chair-legs.

You're the man for the task, Thomas, Mallory said. You know that you may have whatever help I can offer, if the cause ever needs me.

It cheers me to hear that, Ned. I do trust in your strength of heart, your stubborn fixity of purpose. Proved true as steel, two years' hard labor in the Wyoming wilderness! Why, there are men I see every week, who claim great devotion to Science, yet dream of nothing but gold medals and professors' caps.

Huxley was pacing faster. An abominable blur of cant, of humbug and self-seeking, surrounds everything in England today. Huxley stopped dead. That is to say, Ned, that I sometimes suppose that I myself am tainted, the possibility of which I hold in morbid dread.

Never, Mallory assured him.

It's good to have you back among us, Huxley said, resuming his pacing. And famous, better yet! We must capitalize on that advantage. You must write a travel-book, a thorough account of your exploits.

Odd that you should mention that, Mallory said. I have just such a book here in my bag. 'The Mission to China and Japan', by Laurence Oliphant. A very clever chap, it seems.

Oliphant of the Geographical? Man's a hopeless case; too clever by half, and lies like a politician. No, I propose a popular rendition, something a mechanic can understand, the sort of chap who furnishes his sitting-room with a Pembroke table and a crockery shepherd and shepherdess! I tell you, Ned, that it's vital to the great work. Good money in it as well.

Mallory was taken aback. I talk well enough when I've a head of steam up, but to write a whole book in cold blood 

We'll find you a Grub Street hack to varnish the rougher bits, Huxley said, a common enough stratagem, believe me. This fellow Disraeli, whose father founded 'Disraeli's Quarterly', you know. Bit of a madcap. Writes sensation-novels. Trash. But he's steady enough when he's sober.

Benjamin Disraeli? My sister Agatha dotes on his romances.

Something in Huxley's nod was meant to tell Mallory that a female of the Huxley clan would not be caught dead with a popular novel. We must talk about your Royal Society Symposium, Ned, your forthcoming address on the Brontosaurus. It will be quite the event, a very useful public podium. Do you have a good picture, for publicity?

Why, no, Mallory said.

Maull and Polyblank are your men, then, daguerreotypists to the gentry.

I'll make a note of that.

Huxley crossed to the mahogany-framed blackboard behind his desk, taking up a sterling chalk-holder. Maull & Polyblank, he wrote, in quick, flowing cursive.

He turned. You'll need a kinotropist as well, and I've just the fellow. He does a good deal of Royal Society work. Tends to somewhat excessively fancy work, so he'll steal your show with his clacking, given half a chance. Loading every rift with ore, as he puts it. But he's a clever little chap.

John Keats, he wrote.

This is invaluable, Thomas!

Huxley paused. There's another matter, Ned. I hesitate to mention it.

What is that?

I don't wish to wound your personal feelings.

Mallory smiled falsely. I do know I'm not much of a speaker, but I have held my own in the past.

Huxley paused, then lifted his hand abruptly. What do you call this?

I call it a piece of chalk, Mallory said, humoring him.

Chaark?

Chalk! Mallory repeated.

We must do something about those broad Sussex vowels, Ned. There's a fellow I know, an elocutionist. Very discreet little man. French, actually, but he speaks the finest English you've ever heard. A week's lessons with him would do wonders.

Mallory scowled. You're not saying I need wonders, I should hope?

Not at all! It's a simple matter of educating one's ear. You'd be surprised to know how many rising public speakers have patronized this gentleman. Jules D'Alembert, Huxley wrote. His lessons are a bit dear, but—

Mallory took the name down.

A knock came at the door. Huxley swiped at the board with the dusty felt of an ebony-handled eraser. Enter! A stocky man in a plaster-spotted apron appeared. You'll remember Mr. Trenham Reeks, our Assistant Curator.

Reeks tucked a tall folio-binder under his arm and shook Mallory's hand. Reeks had lost some hair and put on weight since Mallory had last seen him. Sorry for the delay, sir, Reeks said. We're having a time of it in the studio, casting those vertebrae. Astonishing structure. The sheer scale presents terrific problems.

Huxley cleared a space on his desk. Noel tugged his father's sleeve, and whispered something. Oh, very well, Huxley said. Pardon us a moment, gentlemen. He led Noel from the office.

Congratulations on your promotion, Mr. Reeks, Mallory said.

Thank you, sir, Reeks said. He opened the binder, then set a ribboned pince-nez on his nose. And thank you for this great discovery. Though I must say, it challenges the very scale of our institution! He tapped at a sheet of graphed foolscap. As you may see.

Mallory studied the sketch, a floor-plan of the Museum's central hall, with the skeleton of the Leviathan superimposed. Where's its skull? he said.

The neck extends completely into the entrance-hall, Reeks said proudly. We shall have to move several cabinets 

Do you have a side-view?

Reeks plucked it from the sheaf of sketches. Mallory examined it, scowling. What is your authority for this anatomical arrangement?

There are very few published papers on the creature, to date, Reeks said, hurt. The longest and most thorough is by Dr. Foulke, in last month's Transactions. He offered the magazine from within the folder.

Mallory brushed it aside. Foulke has completely distorted the nature of the specimen.

Reeks blinked. Dr. Foulke's reputation—

Foulke is a Uniformitarian! He was Rudwick's cabinet-man, one of his closest allies. Foulke's paper is a tissue of absurdities. He claims that the beast was cold-blooded and semi-aquatic! That it ate soft water-plants and moved sluggishly.

But a creature of this vast size, Dr. Mallory, this enormous weight! It would seem that a life in water, to support the mass alone

I see, Mallory broke in. He struggled to regain his temper. It was no use annoying poor Reeks; the man was a functionary, who knew no better, and meant well. This explains why you have its neck stretched out limply, almost at floor-level and it also accounts for the lizard-like—no, the amphibian—jointing of its legs.

Yes, sir, Reeks said. One envisions it harvesting water-plants with that long neck, you see, seldom needing to move its great body very far, or very swiftly. Except perhaps to wade away from predators, if there were anything hungry enough to tackle such a monster.

Mr. Reeks, this creature was not some great soft-bodied salamander. You have been made the victim of a grave misconception. This creature was like a modern elephant, like a giraffe, but on a far greater scale. It was evolved to rip out and devour the tops of trees.

Mallory took a pencil from the desk and began to sketch rapidly and expertly. It spent much of its time on its hind legs, propped on its tail, with its head far above the ground. Make a note of this thickening in the caudal vertebrae. A sure sign of enormous pressure, from a bipedal stance. He tapped the blueprint, and went on. A herd of these creatures could have demolished an entire forest in short order. They migrated, Mr. Reeks, as elephants do, over vast distances, and quickly, changing the very landscape with their devastating appetites. The Brontosaur had an erect, narrow-chested stance, its legs quite columnar and vertical, for the swift, stiff-kneed stride of an elephant. None of this frog-like business.

I modeled the stance on the crocodile, Reeks protested.

The Cambridge Institute of Engine Analytics has completed my stress-analysis, Mallory said. He stepped to his valise, pulled out a bound sheaf of fan-fold paper, and slapped it down. The creature could not have stood a moment on dry land, with its legs in that absurd position.

Yes, sir, Reeks said quietly. That accounts for the aquatic hypothesis.

Look at its toes! Mallory said. They're thick as foundation-stones; not the webbed feet of a swimmer. And look at the flanges of its spinal vertebrae. This creature levered itself up at the hip-joint, to reach great heights. Like a construction-crane! 

Reeks removed his pince-nez. He began to polish it with a linen kerchief from his trouser-pocket. This is not going to please Dr. Foulke, he said. Or his colleagues either, I daresay.

I've not yet begun with that lot, Mallory said.

Huxley re-entered the office, leading his son by the hand. He looked from Reeks to Mallory. Oh dear, he said. Already deep into it, I see.

It's this nonsense of Foulke's, Mallory said. He seems determined to prove that dinosaurs were unfit to live! He's portrayed my Leviathan as a buoyed slug, sucking up pond-weed.

You must agree it hadn't much of a brain, Huxley said.

It doesn't follow, Thomas, that it was torpid. Everyone admits that Rudwick's dinosaur could fly. These creatures were swift and active.

Actually, now that Rudwick's no longer with us, there's some revisionary thought on that topic, Huxley said. Some say his flying reptile could only glide.

Mallory bit back a curse, for the sake of the child in the room. Well, it all comes back to basic theory, doesn't it, he said. The Uniformitarian faction wish these creatures to seem dull and sluggish! Dinosaurs will then fit their slope of gradual development, a slow progression to the present day. Whereas, if you grant the role of Catastrophe, you admit a far greater state of Darwinian fitness for these magnificent creatures, wounding as that may seem to the vanities of tiny modern-day mammals on the order of Foulke and his cronies.

Huxley sat down. He propped one hand against his whiskered cheek. You disagree with the arrangement of the specimen?

It seems Dr. Mallory prefers it standing, Reeks said. Prepared to dine upon a tree-top.

Could we manage that position, Mr. Reeks?

Reeks looked startled. He tucked his pince-nez in a pocket behind his apron. Then he scratched his head. I think perhaps we might, sir. If we mounted it under the skylight, and braced it from the ceiling-girders. Might have to bend its neck a bit We could aim its head at the audience! It would be quite dramatic.

A sop to the Cerberus of popularity, Huxley said. Though I question the consequences to the fluttered nerves of paleontology. I confess I'm not at all at ease with this argument. I've not yet read Foulke's paper, and you, Mallory, have yet to publish on the topic. And I shouldn't care to add to the heat of the Catastrophist debate. 'Natura non facit saltum.' 

But Nature does leap, Mallory said. The Engine simulations prove it. Complex systems can make sudden transformations.

Never mind the theory. What can you make of the evidence directly at hand?

I can make a good case. I will, at my public lecture. Not a perfect case, but better than the opposition's.

Would you stake your reputation as a scholar on it? Have you considered every question, every objection?

I could be wrong, Mallory said. But not so entirely wrong as they are.

Huxley tapped his desk with a reservoir-pen. What if I ask—as an elementary matter—how this creature could have eaten woody foliage? Its head is scarcely larger than a horse's, and its teeth are remarkably poor.

It didn't chew with its teeth, Mallory said. It had a gizzard, lined with grinding stones. Judging by the size of the ribcage, this organ must have been a yard long and weighed perhaps a hundred pounds. A hundred-weight of gizzard has more muscular power than the jaws of four bull elephants.

Why would a reptile need that quantity of nourishment?

It wasn't warm-blooded per se, but it had a high metabolism. It's a simple matter of surface-to-volume ratios. A bodily mass of that size retains its heat even in cold weather. Mallory smiled. The equations are simply calculated, requiring no more than an hour on one of the Society's smaller Engines.

Dire trouble will come of this, Huxley murmured.

Are we to let politics stand in the way of truth?

Touche. He has us, Mr. Reeks I'm afraid you must alter your painstaking plans.

The lads in the studio love a challenge, sir, Reeks said loyally. And if I may say so, Dr. Huxley, a controversy does wonders for our attendance.

One more minor matter, Mallory said quickly. The condition of the skull. Alas, the specimen's skull is quite fragmentary, and will require close study, and a certain amount of conjecture. I should like to join you in the studio on the matter of the skull, Mr. Reeks.

Certainly, sir. I'll see that you're given a key.

Lord Gideon Mantell taught me everything I knew about the modeling of plaster, Mallory declared, with a show of nostalgia. It's been too long since I last came to grips with that worthy craft. It will be a great pleasure to observe the latest advances in technique, in such exemplary surroundings.

Huxley smiled, with a hint of dubiousness. I do hope we can satisfy you, Ned.


Mopping the back of his neck with a kerchief. Mallory unhappily contemplated the headquarters of the Central Statistics Bureau.

Ancient Egypt had been dead for twenty-five centuries, but Mallory had come to know it well enough to dislike it. The French excavation of the Suez Canal had been an heroic business, so that all things Egyptian had become the Parisian mode. The rage had seized Britain as well, leaving the nation awash with scarab neck-pins, hawk-winged teapots, lurid stereographs of toppled obelisks, and faux-marble miniatures of the noseless Sphinx. Manufacturers had Engine-embroidered that whole beast-headed rabble of pagan godlets on curtains and carpets and carriage-robes, much to Mallory's distaste, and he had come to take an especial dislike to silly maunderings about the Pyramids, ruins which inspired exactly the sort of chuckle-headed wonderment that most revolted his sensibilities.

He had, of course, read admiringly of the engineering feats of Suez. Lacking coal, the French had fueled their giant excavators with bitumen-soaked mummies, stacked like cordwood and sold by the ton. Still, he resented the space usurped by Egyptology in the geographical journals.

The Central Statistics Bureau, vaguely pyramidal in form and excessively Egyptianate in its ornamental detail, squatted solidly in the governmental heart of Westminster, its uppermost stories slanting to a limestone apex. For the sake of increased space, the building's lower section was swollen out-of-true, like some great stone turnip. Its walls, pierced by towering smokestacks, supported a scattered forest of spinning ventilators, their vanes annoyingly hawk-winged. The whole vast pile was riddled top to bottom with thick black telegraph-lines, as though individual streams of the Empire's information had bored through solid stone. A dense growth of wiring swooped down, from conduits and brackets, to telegraph-poles crowded thick as the rigging in a busy harbor.

Mallory crossed the hot sticky tarmac of Horseferry Road, wary of the droppings of the pigeons clustered in the web-work of cable overhead.

The Bureau's fortress-doors, framed by lotus-topped columns and Briticized bronze sphinxes, loomed some twenty feet in height. Smaller, work-a-day doors were set into their corners. Mallory, scowling, strode into cool dimness and the faint but pervasive odors of lye and linseed oil. The simmering London stew was behind him now, but the damned place had no windows. Egyptianate jets lit the darkness, their flames breezily guttering in fan-shaped reflectors of polished tin.

He showed his citizen-card at the visitors' desk. The clerk—or perhaps he was some sort of policeman, for he wore a new-fangled Bureau uniform with an oddly military look—made careful note of Mallory's destination. He took an Engine-printed floor-plan of the building from beneath his counter, and marked out Mallory's twisting route in red ink.

Mallory, still smarting from the morning's meeting with the Nominations Committee of the Geographical, thanked the man rather too brusquely. Somehow—he didn't know which devious strings had been pulled back-stage, but the plot was clear enough—Foulke had maneuvered his way onto the Geographical's Nominations Committee. Foulke, whose aquatic theory of Brontosaurus had been spurned by Huxley's museum, had taken Mallory's arborivore hypothesis as a personal attack, with the result that an ordinarily pleasant formality had become yet another public trial for radical Catastrophism. Mallory had won his Fellowship, in the end, Oliphant having laid the ground too well for Foulke's last minute ambush to succeed, but the business still rankled. He sensed damage to his reputation. Dr. Edward Mallory—Leviathan Mallory, as the penny-papers insisted on having it—had been made to seem fanatical, even petty. And this in front of dignified geographers of the first rank, men like Button of Mecca and Elliot of the Congo.

Mallory followed his map, muttering to himself. The fortunes of scholarly warfare, Mallory thought, had never seemed to favor him as they did Thomas Huxley. Huxley's feuds with the powers-that-be had only distinguished him as a wizard of debate, while Mallory was reduced to trudging this gas-lit mausoleum, where he hoped to identify a despicable race-track pimp.

Taking his first turn, he discovered a marble bas-relief depicting the Mosaic Plague of Frogs, which he had always numbered among his favorite Biblical tales. Pausing in admiration, he was very nearly run down by a steel push-cart, stacked to the gunwales with decks of punch-cards.

Gangway! yelped the carter, in brass-buttoned serge and a messenger's billed cap. Mallory saw with astonishment that the man wore wheeled boots, stout lace-ups fitted with miniature axles and spokeless rounds of rubber. The fellow shot headlong down the hall, expertly steering the heavy cart, and vanished around a corner.

Mallory passed a hall, blocked off with striped sawhorses, where two apparent lunatics, in gas-lit gloom, crept slowly about on all fours. Mallory stared. The creepers were plump, middle-aged women, dressed throat-to-foot in spotless white, their hair confined by snug elastic turbans. From a distance their clothing had the eerie look of winding-sheets. As he watched, one of the pair lurched heavily to her feet and began to tenderly wipe the ceiling with a sponge-mop on a telescoping pole.

They were charwomen.

Following his map to a lift, he was ushered in by a uniformed attendant and carried to another level. The air, here, was dry and static, the corridors busier. There were more of the odd-looking policemen, admixed with serious-looking gentlemen of the capital barristers perhaps, or attorneys, or the legislative agents of great capitalists, men whose business it was to acquire and retail knowledge of the attitudes and influence of the public. Political men, in short, who dealt entirely in the intangible. And though they presumably had their wives, their children, their brownstone homes, here they struck Mallory as vaguely ghost-like or ecclesiastical.

Some yards on. Mallory was forced to abruptly dodge a second wheeled messenger. He caught himself against a decorative cast-iron column. The metal scorched his hands. Despite its lavish ornamentation—lotus blossoms—the column was a smokestack. He could hear it emitting the muffled roar and mutter of a badly adjusted flue.

Consulting his map again, he entered a corridor lined left and right with offices. White-coated clerks ducked from door to door, dodging young messenger-boys rolling about with card-laden wheelbarrows. The gas-lights were brighter here, but they fluttered in a steady draft of wind. Mallory glanced over his shoulder. At the end of the hall stood a giant steel-framed ventilator-fan. It squealed faintly, on an oiled chain-drive, propelled by an unseen motor in the bowels of the pyramid.

Mallory began to feel rather dazed. Likely this had all been a grave mistake. Surely there were better ways to pursue the mystery of Derby Day, than hunting pimps with some bureaucratic crony of Oliphant's. The very air of the place oppressed him, scorched and soapy and lifeless, the floors and walls polished and gleaming He'd never before seen a place so utterly free of common dirt These halls reminded him of something, another labyrinthine journey

Lord Darwin.

Mallory and the great savant had been walking the leaf-shadowed hedgy lanes of Kent, Darwin poking at the moist black soil with his walking-stick. Darwin talking, on and on, in his endless, methodical, crushingly detailed way, of earthworms. Earthworms, always invisibly busy underfoot, so that even great sarsen-stones slowly sank into the loam. Darwin had measured the process, at Stonehenge, in an attempt to date the ancient monument.

Mallory tugged hard at his beard, his map forgotten in his hand. A vision came to him of earthworms churning in catastrophic frenzy, till the soil roiled and bubbled like a witches' brew. In years, mere months perhaps, all the monuments of slower eons would sink shipwrecked to primeval bedrock

Sir? May I be of service?

Mallory came to himself with a start. A white-coated clerk was confronting him, staring into his face with bespectacled suspicion. Mallory glared back, confused. For a divine moment he had poised on the brink of revelation, and now it was gone, as miserably inglorious as a failed sneeze.

Worse yet. Mallory now realized he had been muttering aloud again. About earthworms, presumably. Gruffly, he proffered his map. Looking for Level 5, QC-50.

That would be Quantitative Criminology, sir. This is Deterrence Research. The clerk pointed at a shingle hung above a nearby office door. Mallory nodded numbly.

QC is just past Nonlinear Analysis, around the corner to your right, the clerk said. Mallory moved on. He could feel the clerk's skeptical eyes on his back.

The QC section was a honeycomb of tiny partitions, the neck-high walls riddled with asbestos-lined cubbyholes. Gloved and aproned clerks sat neatly at their slanted desks, examining and manipulating punch-cards with a variety of specialized clacker's devices shufflers, pin-mounts, isin-glass color-coders, jeweler's loupes, oiled tissues, and delicate rubber-tipped forceps. Mallory watched the familiar work with a happy lurch of reassurance.

QC-50 was the office of the Bureau's Undersecretary for Quantitative Criminology, whose name, Oliphant had said, was Wakefield.

Mr. Wakefield possessed no desk, or rather his desk had encompassed and devoured the entirety of his office, and Wakefield worked from within it. Writing-tables sprang from wall-slots on an ingenious system of hinges, then vanished again into an arcane system of specialized cabinetry. There were newspaper-racks, letter-clamps, vast embedded cardfiles, catalogues, code-books, clacker's-guides, an elaborate multi-dialed clock, three telegraph-dials whose gilded needles ticked out the alphabet, and printers busily punching tape.

Wakefield himself was a pallid Scot with sandy, receding hair. His glance, if not positively evasive, was extremely mobile. A pronounced overbite dented his lower-lip.

He struck Mallory as very young for a man of his position, perhaps only forty. No doubt, like most accomplished clackers, Wakefield had grown up with the Engine trade. Babbage's very first Engine, now an honored relic, was still less than thirty years old, but the swift progression of Enginery had swept a whole generation in its wake, like some mighty locomotive of the mind.

Mallory introduced himself. I regret my tardiness, sir, Mallory said. I found myself a bit lost in your halls.

This was no news to Wakefield. May I offer you tea? We have a very fine sponge cake.

Mallory shook his head, then opened his cigar-case with a flourish. Smoke?

Wakefield went pale. No! No thank you. A fire hazard, strictly against regulations.

Mallory put his case away, chagrined. I see But I don't see any real harm in a fine cigar, do you?

Ashes! Wakefield said firmly. And pneumatic particles! They float through air, soil the cog-oil, defile the gearing. And to clean the Bureau's Engines—well, I needn't tell you that's a Sisyphean task, Dr. Mallory.

Surely, Mallory mumbled. He tried to change the subject. As you must know, I am a paleontologist, but I have some small expertise in clacking. How many gear-yards do you spin here?

Yards? We measure our gearage in miles here. Dr. Mallory.

 'Struth! That much power?

That much trouble, you might as easily say, Wakefield said, with a modest flick of his white-gloved hand. Heat builds up from spinning-friction, which expands the brass, which nicks the cog-teeth. Damp weather curdles the gear-oil—and in dry weather, a spinning Engine can even create a small Leyden-charge, which attracts all manner of dirt! Gears gum and jam, punch-cards adhere in the loaders Wakefield sighed. We've found it pays well to take 'every precaution in cleanliness, heat, and humidity. Even our tea-cake is baked specially for the Bureau, to reduce the risk of crumbs!

Something about the phrase the risk of crumbs struck Mallory as comic, but Wakefield had such a sober look that it was clear no jest was intended. Have you tried Colgate's Vinegar-Cleanser? Mallory asked. They swear by it at Cambridge.

Ah yes, Wakefield drawled, the dear old Institute of Engine Analytics. I wish we had the leisurely pace of the academics! They pamper their brass at Cambridge, but here in public service, we must run and re-run the most grueling routines till we warp the decimal-levers.

Mallory, having been recently to the Institute, was up-to-date and determined to show it. Have you heard of the new Cambridge compilers? They distribute gear-wear much more evenly—

Wakefield ignored him. For Parliament and the police, the Bureau is simply a resource, you see. Always on demand, but kept on a tight lead for all of that. Funding, you see. They cannot fathom our requirements, sir! The old sad story, as I'm sure you know. Man of science yourself. I don't mean to be disrespectful, but the House of Commons can't tell true clacking from a wind-up cooking-jack.

Mallory tugged his beard. It does seem a pity. Miles of gearing! When I imagine what might be accomplished with that, the prospect is breathtaking.

Oh, I'm sure you'd catch your breath soon enough. Dr. Mallory, Wakefield said. In clacking, demand always expands to overmatch the capacity. It's as if it were a law of Nature!

Perhaps it is a law, Mallory said, in some realm of Nature we've yet to comprehend 

Wakefield smiled politely and shot a glance at his clock. A shame, when one's higher aspirations are overwhelmed by daily practicalities. I don't often have the chance to discuss Engine philosophy. Except with my soi-disant colleague, Mr. Oliphant, of course. Has he, perhaps, told you of his visionary schemes for our Engines?

Only quite briefly, Mallory said. It seemed to me his plans for, er, social studies, would demand more Engine-power than we have in Great Britain. To monitor every transaction in Piccadilly, and so forth. Struck me as a Utopian fancy, frankly.

In theory, sir, Wakefield responded, it is entirely possible. We naturally keep a brotherly eye on the telegram-traffic, credit-records, and such. The human element is our only true bottle-neck, you see, for only a trained analyst can turn raw Engine-data into workable knowledge. And the ambitious scale of that effort, when compared with the modest scale of the Bureau's current funding for personnel—

I'm sure I wouldn't care to add to the pressing burden of your duty, Mallory broke in, but Mr. Oliphant did indicate that you might help me to identify a criminal at large and his female accomplice. Having completed two of your request-forms in triplicate, I dispatched them in by special messenger 

Last week, yes. Wakefield nodded. And we've done our best for you. We're always happy to oblige gentlemen as peculiarly distinguished as Mr. Oliphant and yourself. An assault, and a threat of death against a prominent savant, is a serious matter, of course. Wakefield plucked up a needle-sharp pencil and a gridded pad of paper. But a rather commonplace business, to attract Mr. Oliphant's specialized interests, isn't it?

Mallory said nothing.

Wakefield looked grave. You needn't fear to speak frankly, sir. This isn't the first time that Mr. Oliphant, or his superiors, have called on our resources. And, of course, as a sworn officer of the Crown, I can guarantee you the strictest confidentiality. Nothing you say will leave these walls. He leaned forward. So. What can you tell me, sir?

Mallory thought hard and quickly. Whatever blunder Lady Ada had committed—whatever act of desperation or recklessness had led her into the clutches of the tout and his whore—he could not imagine it helped by the name Ada Byron going onto that gridded pad. And Oliphant, of course, would not approve.

So Mallory feigned a reluctant confession. You have me at a disadvantage, Mr. Wakefield, for I don't believe there's much to the matter—nothing to truly earn me the privilege of your attention! As I said in my note to you, I encountered a drunken gambler at the Derby, and the rascal made a bit of a show with a knife. I thought little enough of it—but Mr. Oliphant suggested that I might be in genuine danger. He reminded me that one of my colleagues was murdered recently, in odd circumstances. And the case is still unresolved.

Professor Fenwick, the dinosaur savant?

Rudwick, Mallory said. You know the case?

Stabbed to death. In a ratting-den. Wakefield tapped his teeth with the pencil's rubber. Made all the papers, threw quite a bad light on the savantry. One feels that Rudwick rather let the side down.

Mallory nodded. My sentiments exactly. But Mr. Oliphant seemed to feel that the incidents might be connected.

Gamblers, stalking and killing savants? Wakefield said. I see no motive, frankly. Unless perhaps, and do forgive the suggestion, a large gambling debt is involved. Were you and Rudwick close friends? Wagering companions, perhaps?

Not at all. I scarcely knew the man. And I owe no such debts, I assure you.

Mr. Oliphant does not believe in accident, Wakefield said. He seemed to have been convinced by Mallory's evasion, for he was clearly losing interest. Of course, it is only prudent of you to identify the rascal. If that's all you need of us. I'm sure we can be of service. I'll have a staffer take you to the library, and the Engines. Once we've this assailant's number, we'll be on firmer ground.

Wakefield flipped up a hinged rubber stopper and shouted into a speaking-tube. A young Cockney clerk appeared, in gloves and apron. This is our Mr. Tobias, Wakefield said. He's at your disposal. The interview was over—Wakefield's eyes were already glazing with the press of other business. He gave a mechanical bow. Pleasure-to-have-met-you, sir. Please let me know if-we-can-be-of-any-further-service.

You're most kind, Mallory said.

The boy had shaven an inch of scalp at his hairline, elevating his forehead for a modishly intellectual look, but time had passed since the clerk's last harboring, for he now had a prickly ridge of stubble across the front of his noggin. Mallory followed him out of the maze of cubicles into a hallway, noting his odd, rolling gait. The clerk's shoe-heels were worn so badly that the nails showed, and his cheap cotton stockings had bagged at the ankles.

Where are we going, Mr. Tobias?

Engines, sir. Downstairs.

They paused at the lift, where an ingenious indicator showed that it was on another floor. Mallory reached into his trouser-pocket, past the jack-knife and the keys. He pulled out a golden guinea. Here.

What's this then? Tobias asked, taking it.

It is what we call a tip, my boy, Mallory said, with forced joviality.  'To Insure Promptness,' you know.

Tobias examined the coin as if he had never seen the profile of Albert before. He gave Mallory a sharp and sullen look from behind his spectacles.

The lift's door opened. Tobias hid the coin in his apron. He and Mallory stepped aboard amid a small crowd, and the attendant ratcheted the cage down into the Bureau's bowels.

Mallory followed Tobias out of the lift, past a rack of pneumatic mail-chutes, and through a pair of swinging doors, their edges lined with thick felt. They were alone again. Tobias stopped short. You should know better than to offer gratuities to a public servant.

You look as if you could use it, Mallory said.

Ten days' wage? Expect I could. Providin' I find you right and fly.

I mean no harm, Mallory said mildly. This place is strange territory. In such circumstances, I've found it wise to have a native guide.

What's wrong with the boss, then?

I was hoping you'd tell me that, Mr. Tobias.

More than the coin, the remark itself seemed to win Tobias over. He shrugged. Wakey's not so bad. If I were him, I wouldn't act any different. But he ran your number today, guv'nor, and pulled a stack on you nine inches high. You've some talkative friends, you do, Mr. Mallory.

Did he now? Mallory said, forcing a smile. That file must make interesting reading. I'd surely like a look at it.

I do suppose that intelligence might find its way to improper hands, the boy allowed. Of course, 'twould be worth a fellow's job, if he were caught at it.

Do you like your work, Mr. Tobias?

Pay's not much. Gas-light ruins your eyes. But it has advantages. He shrugged again, and pushed his way through another door, into a clattering anteroom, three of its walls lined with shelves and card-files, the fourth with fretted glass.

Behind the glass loomed a vast hall of towering Engines—so many that at first Mallory thought the walls must surely be lined with mirrors, like a fancy ballroom. It was like some carnival deception, meant to trick the eye—the giant identical Engines, clock-like constructions of intricately interlocking brass, big as rail-cars set on end, each on its foot-thick padded blocks. The white-washed ceiling, thirty feet overhead, was alive with spinning pulley-belts, the lesser gears drawing power from tremendous spoked flywheels on socketed iron columns. White-coated clackers, dwarfed by their machines, paced the spotless aisles. Their hair was swaddled in wrinkled white berets, their mouths and noses hidden behind squares of white gauze.

Tobias glanced at these majestic racks of gearage with absolute indifference. All day starin' at little holes. No mistakes, either! Hit a key-punch wrong and it's all the difference between a clergyman and an arsonist. Many's the poor innocent bastard ruined like that 

The tick and sizzle of the monster clockwork muffled his words.

Two men, well-dressed and quiet, were engrossed in their work in the library. They bent together over a large square album of color-plates. Pray have a seat, Tobias said.

Mallory seated himself at a library table, in a maple swivel-chair mounted on rubber wheels, while Tobias selected a card-file. He sat opposite Mallory and leafed through the cards, pausing to dab a gloved finger in a small container of beeswax. He retrieved a pair of cards. Were these your requests, sir?

I filled out paper questionnaires. But you've put all that in Engine-form, eh?

Well, QC took the requests, Tobias said, squinting. But we had to route it to Criminal Anthropometry. This card's seen use—they've done a deal of the sorting-work already. He rose suddenly and fetched a loose-leaf notebook—a clacker's guide. He compared one of Mallory's cards to some ideal within the book, with a look of distracted disdain. Did you fill the forms out completely, sir?

I think so, Mallory hedged.

Height of suspect, the boy mumbled, reach Length and width of left ear, left foot, left forearm, left forefinger.

I supplied my best estimates, Mallory said. Why just the left side, if I may ask?

Less affected by physical work, Tobias said absently. Age, coloration of skin, hair, eyes. Scars, birthmarks ah, now then. Deformities.

The man had a bump on the side of his forehead, Mallory said.

Frontal plagiocephaly, the boy said, checking his book. Rare, and that's why it struck me. But that should be useful. They're spoony on skulls, in Criminal Anthropometry. Tobias plucked up the cards, dropped them through a slot, and pulled a bell-rope. There was a sharp clanging. In a moment a clacker arrived for the cards.

Now what? Mallory said.

We wait for it to spin through, the boy said.

How long?

It always takes twice as long as you think, the boy said, settling back in his chair. Even if you double your estimate. Something of a natural law.

Mallory nodded. The delay could not be helped, and might be useful. Have you worked here long, Mr. Tobias?

Not long enough to go mad.

Mallory chuckled.

You think I'm joking, Tobias said darkly.

Why do you work here, if you hate it so?

Everyone hates it, who has a spark of sense, Tobias said. Of course, it's fine work here, if you work the top floors, and are one of the big'uns. He jabbed his gloved thumb, discreetly, at the ceiling. Which I ain't, of course. But mostly, the work needs little folk. They need us by the scores and dozens and hundreds. We come and go. Two years of this work, maybe three, makes your eyes and your nerves go. You can go quite mad from staring at little holes. Mad as a dancing dormouse. Tobias slid his hands into his apron-pockets. I'll wager you think, sir, from looking at us low clerks dressed like so many white pigeons, that we're all the same inside! But we ain't, sir, not at all. You see, there's only so many people in Britain who can read and write, and spell and add, as neat as they need here. Most coves who can do that, they'll get far better work, if they've a mind to look. So the Bureau gets your well unsettled sorts. Tobias smiled thinly. They've even hired women sometimes. Seamstresses, what lost their jobs to knitting-jennies. Government hire 'em to read and punch cards. Very good at detail-work, your former seamstresses.

It seems an odd policy, Mallory said.

Pressure of circumstance, Tobias said. Nature of the business. You ever work for Her Majesty's Government, Mr. Mallory?

In a way, Mallory said. He'd worked for the Royal Society's Commission on Free Trade. He'd believed their patriotic talk, their promises of back-stage influence—and they'd cut him loose to fend for himself, when they were through with him. A private audience with the Commission's Lord Gallon, a warm handshake, an expression of deep regret that there could be no open recognition of his gallant service  And that was all. Not so much as a signed scrap of paper.

What kind of Government work? Tobias said.

Ever seen the so-called Land Leviathan?

In the museum, Tobias said. Brontosaurus they call it, a reptile elephant. Had its teeth in the end of its trunk. The beast ate trees.

Clever chap, Tobias.

You're Leviathan Mallory, Tobias said, the famous savant! He flushed bright red.

A bell rang. Tobias leapt to his feet. He took a pamphlet of accordioned paper from a tray in the wall.

In luck, sir. Male suspect is done. I told you the skull business would help. Tobias spread the paper on the table, before Mallory.

It was a collection of stipple-printed Engine-portraits. Dark-haired Englishmen with hangdog looks. The little square picture-bits of the Engine-prints were just big enough to distort their faces slightly, so that the men all seemed to have black drool in their mouths and dirt in the corners of their eyes. They all looked like brothers, some strange human sub-species of the devious and disenchanted. The portraits were nameless; they had citizen-numbers beneath them. I hadn't expected dozens of them, Mallory said.

We could have narrowed the choice, with better parameters on the anthropometry, Tobias said. But just take your time, sir, and look closely. If we have him, he's here.

Mallory stared at the glowering ranks of numbered scapegraces, many of them with disquietingly misshapen heads. He remembered the tout's face with great clarity. He remembered it twisted with homicidal rage, bloody spittle in the cracked teeth. The sight was etched forever in his mind's eye, as vivid as the knuckle-shapes of the beast's spine, when first he'd seen his great prize jutting from the Wyoming shale. In one long dawning moment, then. Mallory had seen through those drab stone lumps and perceived the immanent glow of his own great glory, his coming fame. In just such a manner, he had seen, in the tout's face, a lethal challenge that could transform his life.

But none of these dazed and sullen portraits matched the memory. Is there any reason why you wouldn't have this man?

Perhaps your man has no criminal record, Tobias said. We could run the card again, to check against the general population. But that would take us weeks of Engine-spinning, and require a special clearance from the people upstairs.

Why so long, pray?

Dr. Mallory, we have everyone in Britain in our records. Everyone who's ever applied for work, or paid taxes, or been arrested. Tobias was apologetic, painfully eager to help. Is he a foreigner perhaps?

I'm certain he was British, and a blackguard. He was armed and dangerous. But I simply don't see him here.

Perhaps it is a bad likeness, sir. Your criminal classes, they like to puff out their cheeks for criminal photography. Wads of cotton up their noses, and suchlike tricks. I'm sure he's there, sir.

I don't believe it. Is there another possibility?

Tobias sat down, defeated. That's all we have, sir. Unless you want to change your description.

Might someone have removed his portrait?

Tobias looked shocked. That would be tampering with official files, sir. A felony transportation-offense. I'm sure none of the clerks would have done such a thing. There was a heavy pause.

However? Mallory urged.

Well, the files are sacrosanct, sir. It is what we're all about here, as you know. But there are certain highly placed officials, from outside the Bureau—men who serve the confidential safety of the realm. If you know the gents I mean.

I don't believe I do, Mallory said.

A very few gentlemen, in positions of great trust and discretion, Tobias said. He glanced at the other men in the room, and lowered his voice. Perhaps you've heard of what they call 'the Special Cabinet'? Or the Special Bureau of the Bow Street police?

Anyone else? Mallory said.

Well, the Royal Family, of course. We are servants of the Crown here, after all. If Albert himself were to command our Minister of Statistics

What about the Prime Minister? Lord Byron?

Tobias made no reply. His face had soured.

An idle question, Mallory said. Forget I asked it. It's a scholar's habit, you see—when a topic interests me, I explore its specifics, even to the point of pedantry. But it has no relevance here. Mallory peered at the pictures again, with a show of close attention. No doubt it is my own fault—the light here is not all it might be.

Let me turn up the gas, the boy said, half-rising.

No, Mallory said. Let me save my attention for the woman. Perhaps we'll have better luck there.

Tobias sank back in his seat. As they awaited the Engine-spin, Mallory feigned a relaxed indifference. Slow work, eh, Mr. Tobias? A lad of your intelligence must long for a greater challenge.

I do love Engines, Tobias said. Not these great lummox monsters, but the cleverer, aesthetic ones. I wanted to learn clacking.

Why aren't you in school, then?

Can't afford it, sir. The family doesn't approve.

Did you try the National Merit Exams?

No scholarship for me—I failed the calculus. Tobias looked sullen. I'm no scientist, anyway. It's art that I live for. Kinotropy!

Theatre work, eh? They say it's in the blood.

I spend every spare shilling on spinning-time, the boy said. We have a little club of enthusiasts. The Palladium rents its kinotrope to us, during the wee hours. You see quite amazing things, sometimes, along with a deal of amateur drivel.

Fascinating, Mallory said. I hear that, er He had to struggle to recall the man's name. I hear that John Keats is quite good.

He's old, the boy said, with a ruthless shrug. You should see Sandys. Or Hughes. Or Etty! And there's a clacker from Manchester whose work is quite splendid—Michael Radley. I saw a show of his here in London, last winter. A lecture tour, with an American.

Kinotrope lectures can be very improving.

Oh, the speaker was a crooked Yankee politician. If I had my way, they'd throw the speaker out entirely, and run silent pictures.

Mallory let the conversation lapse. Tobias squirmed a bit, wanting to speak again and not quite daring to take that liberty, and then the bell rang. The boy was up like a shot, with a scratchy skid of his worthless shoes, and back with another set of fan-fold paper.

Red-heads, he said, and smiled sheepishly.

Mallory grunted. He studied the women with close attention. They were fallen women, ruined women, with the sodden look of fall and ruin marked indelibly in the little black picture-bits of their printed femininity. Unlike the men, the female faces somehow leapt to life for Mallory. Here a round-faced Cockney creature, with a look more savage than a Cheyenne squaw. There a sweet-eyed Irish girl whose lantern jaw had surely embittered her life. There a street-walker with rat's-nest hair and the blear of gin. There, defiance; here, tight-lipped insolence; there, a frozen cajoling look from an Englishwoman with her nape pinched for too long in the daguerreotype's neck-brace.

The eyes, with their calculated plea of injured innocence, held him with a shock of recognition. Mallory tapped the paper, looking up. Here she is!

Tobias started. That's rum, sir! Let me take that number. He punched the citizen-number into a fresh card with a small mahogany switch-press, then fed the card through the wall-tray again. He carefully emptied the bits of punched-out paper into a hinge-topped basket.

This will tell me all about her, will it? Mallory said. He reached inside his jacket for his notebook.

Mostly, sir. A printed summary.

And may I take these documents away with me for study?

No, sir, strictly speaking, as you're not an officer of the law  Tobias lowered his voice. Truth to tell, sir, you could pay a common magistrate, or even his clerk, and have this intelligence for a few shillings, under the rose. Once you've someone's number, the rest is simple enough. It's a common clacker trick, to read the Engine-files on someone of the criminal class—they call it 'pulling his string,' or being 'up on a cake.' 

Mallory found this news of remarkable interest. Suppose I asked for my own file? he said.

Well, sir, you're a gentleman, not a criminal. You're not in the common police-files. Your magistrates, and court-clerks and such, would have to fill out forms, and show good cause for the search. Which we don't grant easily.

Legal protocols, eh? Mallory said.

No, sir, it's no law that stops us, but the simple trouble of it. Such a search consumes Engine-time and money, and we're always over budget in both. But if an M.R made that request, or a Lordship

Suppose I had a good friend here in the Bureau, Mallory said. Someone who admired me for my generous ways.

Tobias looked reluctant, and a bit coy. It ain't a simple matter, sir. Every spinning-run is registered, and each request must have a sponsor. What we did today is done in Mr. Wakefield's name, so there'll be no trouble in that. But your friend would have to forge some sponsor's name, and run the risk of that imposture. It is fraud, sir. An Engine-fraud, like credit-theft or stock-fraud, and punished just the same, when it's found out.

Very enlightening, Mallory said. I've found that one always profits by talking to a technical man who truly knows his business. Let me give you my card.

Mallory extracted one of his Maull & Polyblank cartes-de-visite from his pocket-book. Folding a five-pound note, he pinched it against the back of his card and passed it over. It was a handsome sum. A deliberate investment.

Tobias dug about beneath his apron, found a greasy leather wallet, stuffed in Mallory's card and money, and extracted a dog-eared bit of shiny pasteboard. J. J. TOBIAS, ESQ. , the card said, in grotesquely elaborate Engine-Gothic. KINOTROPY, AND THEATRE COLLECTIBLES. There was a Whitechapel address. Never mind that telegraph number at the bottom, Tobias told him. I had to stop renting it.

Have you any interest in French kinotropy, Mr. Tobias? Mallory said.

Oh, yes, sir, nodded Tobias. Some lovely material is coming out of Montmartre these days.

I understand the best French ordinateurs employ a special gauge of card.

The Napoleon gauge, Tobias said readily. Smaller cards of an artificial substance, which move very swiftly in the compilers. That speed is quite handy in kino-work.

Do you know where a fellow might rent one of these French compilers, here in London?

To translate data from French cards, sir?

Yes, Mallory said, feigning an only casual interest. I expect to receive some data from a French colleague, involving a scientific controversy—rather abstruse, but still a matter of some scholarly confidentiality. I prefer to examine it privately, at my own convenience.

Yes, sir, Tobias said. That is to say, I do know a fellow with a French compiler, and he'd let you do whatever you like with it, if the pay were right. Last year, there was quite a mode in London clacking-circles for the French standard. But sentiment has turned quite against it, what with the troubles of the Grand Napoleon.

Really, Mallory said.

Tobias nodded, delighted to show his authority. I believe it's felt now, sir, that the French were far ahead of themselves with their vast Napoleon project, and made something of a technical misstep!

Mallory stroked his beard. That wouldn't be British professional envy talking, I hope.

Not at all, sir! It's common knowledge that the Grand Napoleon suffered some dire mishap early this year, Tobias assured him, and the great Engine has never spun quite properly since. He lowered his voice. Some claim sabotage! Do you know that French term, sabotage Comes from 'sabots,' the wooden shoes worn by French workers. They can kick an Engine half off its blocks! Tobias grinned at this prospect, with a glee that rather disquieted Mallory. The French have Luddite troubles of a sort, you see, sir, much as we once did, years ago!

Two short notes were sounded on a steam-whistle, reverberating through the white-washed ceiling. The two studious gentlemen, who had been joined by an equally studious third, now closed their albums and left.

The bell rang once more, summoning Tobias to the wall-tray. The boy rose slowly, straightened a chair, wandered down the length of the table, examined the albums for nonexistent dust, and shelved them. I think that's our answer waiting, Mallory said.

Tobias nodded shortly, his back to Mallory. Very likely, sir, but I'm on overtime, see. Those two blasts on the horn 

Mallory rose impatiently and strode to the tray.

No, no, Tobias yelped, not without gloves! Pray let me do it!

Gloves, indeed! Who's to know?

Criminal Anthropometry, that's who! This is their room, and nothing they hate worse than the smudges from bare fingers! Tobias turned with a sheaf of documents. Well, sir, our suspect is one Florence Bartlett, nee Russell, late of Liverpool 

Thank you, Tobias, Mallory said, creasing the sheaf of fan-fold so as to slip it more easily into his Ada-Checkered waistcoat. I do appreciate your help.


One arctic Wyoming morning, the frost thick on the brown and beaten prairie-grass, Mallory had crouched beside the tepid boiler of the expedition's steam-fortress, prodding at its meager buffalo-dung fire, trying to thaw an iron-hard strip of the jerked beef that the men ate for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. At that moment of utter misery, his beard rimed with frozen breath and his shovel-blistered fingers frost-bitten, Mallory had sworn a solemn oath that he would never again curse the summer heat.

But never had he expected so vile a swelter in London.

The night had passed without a breath of wind, and his bed had seemed a fetid stew. He'd slept atop the sheets, a drenched Turkish towel spread across his nakedness, and had risen every hour to dampen the towel again. Now the mattress was soaked and the whole room seemed as hot and close as a greenhouse. It stank of stale tobacco as well, for Mallory had smoked half-a-dozen of his fine Havanas over the criminal record of Florence Russell Bartlett, which dealt primarily with the murder of her husband, a prominent Liverpool cotton-merchant, in the spring of 1853.

The modus operandi had been poisoning by arsenic, which Mrs. Bartlett had extracted from fly-paper and administered over a period of weeks in a patent medicine. Dr. Gove's Hydropathic Strengthener. Mallory, from his nights down Haymarket, knew that Dr. Cove's was in fact a patent aphrodisiac, but the file made no mention of this fact. The fatal illness in 1852 of Bartlett's mother, and of her husband's brother in 1851, were also recorded, their respective certificates of death citing perforated ulcer and cholera morbus. These purported illnesses featured symptoms very like those of arsenic poisoning. Never formally accused of these other deaths, Mrs. Bartlett had escaped custody, overpowering her jailer with a concealed derringer.

The Central Statistics Bureau suspected her of having fled to France, Mallory assumed, because someone had appended translations of French police-reports of 1854 dealing with a crime passionel trial in the Paris assizes. One Florence Murphy, abortionist, purportedly an American refugee, was arrested and tried for the crime of vitriolage, the flinging of sulphuric acid with intent to disfigure or maim. The victim, Marie Lemoine, wife of a prominent Lyons silk-merchant, was an apparent rival.

But Mrs. Murphy had vanished from custody, and from all subsequent French police-records, during the first week of her trial as a vitrioleuse.

Mallory sponged his face, neck, and armpits in tap-water, thinking bleakly of vitriol.

He was perspiring freely again as he laced his shoes. Leaving his room, he discovered that the city's queer summer had overwhelmed the Palace. Sullen humidity simmered over the marble floors like an invisible swamp. The very palms at the foot of the stairs seemed Jurassic. He trudged to the Palace's dining-room, where four cold hard-boiled eggs, iced coffee, a kippered herring, some broiled tomato, a bit of ham, and a chilled melon somewhat restored him. The food here was rather good, though the kipper had smelled a bit off—small wonder, in heat like this. Mallory signed the chit, and left to fetch his mail.

He had been unjust to the kipper. Outside the dining room, the Palace itself stank bad fish, or something much like it. There was a soapy perfume in the front lobby, left from the morning's mopping, but the air was heavy with the humid distant reek of something dreadful, and apparently long-dead. Mallory knew he had smelled that reek before—it was sharp, like acid, mixed with the greasy stench of a slaughterhouse—but he could not place the memory. In a moment the stink was gone again. He stepped to the desk for his mail. The wilted clerk greeted him with a show of courtesy; Mallory had won the staff's loyalty with generous tips. Nothing in my box? said Mallory, surprised.

Too small. Dr. Mallory. The clerk bent to lift a large woven-wire basket, crammed to the brim with envelopes, magazines, and packages.

 'Struth! Mallory said. It gets worse every day!

The clerk nodded knowingly. The price of fame, sir.

Mallory was overwhelmed. I suppose I shall have to read through all of this 

If I may be so bold, sir, I think you might do well to engage a private secretary.

Mallory grunted. He had a loathing of secretaries, valets, butlers, chambermaids, the whole squalid business of service. His own mother had been in service once, with a wealthy family in Sussex, in the old days before the Rads. The fact rankled.

He carried the heavy basket into a quiet corner of the library and began to sort through it. Magazines first the gold-spined 'Transactions of the Royal Society', 'Herpetology of All Nations', 'Journal of Dynamickal Systematics', 'Annales Scientifiques de l'Ecole des Ordinateurs', with what seemed to be an interesting article on the mechanical miseries of the Grand Napoleon This business of the scholarly subscriptions had been a faggot-above-a-load, though he supposed it kept the editors happy, happy editors being half the key to placing one's own articles.

Then the letters. Swiftly, Mallory divided them into piles. Begging-letters first. He had made the mistake of answering a few, that had seemed especially tearful and sincere, and now the scheming rascals had swarmed upon him like lice.

A second pile of business-letters. Invitations to speak, requests for interviews, bills from shopmen, Catastrophist bone-men and rock-hounds offering co-authorship of learned papers.

Then the letters in feminine hand. The broody-hens of natural history—flower-snippers, Huxley called them. They wrote in their scores and dozens, most merely to request his autograph, and, if he so pleased, a signed carte-de-visite. Others would send him coy sketches of common lizards, requesting his expertise in reptile taxonomy. Others would express a delicate admiration, perhaps accompanied with verses, and invite him to tea if he was ever in Sheffield, or Nottingham, or Brighton. And some few, often marked by spiky handwriting, triple underlining!!!, and ribboned locks of hair, would express a warm womanly admiration, and this in terms so bold as to be quite disconcerting. There had been a remarkable flurry of these after his fancy portrait had appeared in 'The Englishwoman's Domestic Weekly'.

Mallory stopped suddenly. He had almost flung aside a letter from his sister Ruth. Dear little Ruthie—but of course the baby of the family was a good seventeen years old now. He opened the letter at once.




DEAR NED,


I write to you at Mother's dictation as her hands are quite bad today. Father thanks you very much for the splendid lap-rug from London. The French liniment has helped my hands (Mother's) very nicely thow more in the knees than the hands. We all miss you much in Lewes thow we know you are busy on yr great affairs of the Royal Society! We read aloud each of yr American adventures as they are written by Mr. Disraeli in Family Museum. Agatha asks will you please please get her Mr. Disraeli's autograph as her favorite novel is his Tancred! But our great news is that our dear Brian is back from Bombay, safely with us this very day June 17! And he has brought with him our dear brother-to-be Lt. Jerry Rawlings, also of the Sussex Artillery, who asked our Madeline to wait for him and of course she did. Now they are to be married, and Mother wants you to know particularly that it will NOT be in a Church but a civil seremony with the J.R Mr. Witherspoon in Lewes City Hall. Will you attend June 29 as Father gives away almost his last bride—I did not want to write that but Mother made me.


All our Love,


    RUTH MALLORY (Miss)

So—Little Madeline, with her man at last. Poor creature, four years was a long engagement, more worrisome still when betrothed to a soldier in a tropical pest-hole like India. She had taken his ring at eighteen, and was now all of twenty-two. A long engagement was a cruel thing to ask of a young and lively girl, and Mallory had seen, in his last visit, that the ordeal had sharpened Madeline's tongue and temper, and made her almost a trial to the household. Soon there would be no one left at home to look after the old folks but little Ruthie. And when Ruth married—well, he would consider that matter in due time. Mallory rubbed his sweating beard. Madeline had had life harder than Ernestina, or Agatha, or Dorothy. She should have something fine for herself, Mallory resolved. A wedding-gift that would prove that she had put an end to her unhappy time.

Mallory took the letter-basket to his room, piled the mail on the floor beside his overflowing bureau, and left the Palace, dropping the basket at the desk on his way out.

A group of Quakers, men and women, stood on the pavement outside the Palace. They were droning another of their intolerable sermonizing ditties, something about a railway to Heaven, by the sound of it. The song did not seem to have much to do with Evolution, or blasphemy, or fossils; but perhaps the sheer monotony of their bootless protests had exhausted even the Quakers. He hurried past them, ignoring their proffered pamphlets. It was hot, uncommon hot, beastly hot. There was not a ray of sun, but the air was mortally still and the high cloudy sky had a leaden, glowering look, as if it wanted to rain but had forgotten the trick of it.

Mallory walked down Gloucester Road to the corner of Cromwell. There was a fine new equestrian statue of Cromwell at the intersection; Cromwell was a great favorite of the Rads. And there were 'buses too, six an hour, but they were all crammed to the gunwales. No one wanted to walk in weather like this.

Mallory tried the Gloucester Road underground, by the corner of Ashburn Mews. As he prepared to descend the stairs a thin crowd came up at a half-run, fleeing a reek of such virulence that it stopped him in his tracks.

Londoners were used to odd smells from their under-grounds, but this stench was clearly of another order entirely. Compared to the sullen heat of the streets, the air was chill, but it had a deathly scent, like something gone rotten in a sealed glass jar. Mallory went to the ticket-office; it was closed, with a sign up saying WE APOLOGIZE FOR THE INCONVENIENCE. No mention of the actual nature of the problem.

Mallory turned. There were horse-drawn cabs at Bailey's Hotel, across Courtfield Road. He prepared to cross the street, but then noticed a cab waiting quite near him at the curb, apparently idle. Signaling the driver, he went to the door. There was a passenger still inside the cab. Mallory waited politely for the man to debark. Instead, the stranger, seeming to resent Mallory's gaze, pressed a kerchief to his face and half-sunk below the level of the window. He began coughing. Perhaps the man was ill, or had just come up from the underground and not yet caught his breath.

Annoyed, Mallory crossed the street and engaged a cab at Bailey's. Piccadilly, he ordered. The driver clicked to his sweating nag and they rolled east up Cromwell Road. Once under-way, with a faint breeze at the window, the heat became less oppressive and Mallory's spirits rose. Cromwell Road, Thurloe Place, Brompton Road—in their vast rebuilding schemes, the Government had reserved these sections of Kensington and Brompton to a vast concourse of Museums and Royal Society Palaces. One by one they passed his window in their sober majesty of cupolas and colonnades Physics, Economics, Chemistry One might complain of some Radical innovations, Mallory mused, but there was no denying the sense and justice of fine headquarters for scholars engaged in the noblest work of mankind. Surely, in their aid to Science, the Palaces had repaid the lavish cost of their construction at least a dozen times.

Up Knightsbridge and past Hyde Park Corner to the Napoleon Arch, a gift from Louis Napoleon to commemorate the Anglo-French Entente. The great iron arch, with its lavish skeleton of struts and bolting, supported a large population of winged cupids and draperied ladies with torches. A handsome monument, Mallory thought, and in the latest taste. Its elegant solidity seemed to deny that there had ever been a trace of discord between Great Britain and her staunchest ally, Imperial France. Perhaps, thought Mallory wryly, the misunderstandings of the Napoleonic Wars could be blamed on the tyrant Wellington.

Though London possessed no monuments to the Duke of Wellington, it sometimes seemed to Mallory that unspoken memories of the man still haunted the city, an unlaid ghost. Once, the great victor of Waterloo had been exalted here, as the very saviour of the British nation; Wellington had been ennobled, and had held the highest office in the land. But in modern England he was vilified as a swaggering brute, a second King John, the butcher of his own restless people. The Rads had never forgotten their hatred for their early and formidable enemy. A full generation had passed since Wellington's death, but Prime Minister Byron still often spattered the Duke's memory with the acid of his formidable eloquence.

Mallory, though a loyal Radical Party man, was unconvinced by mere rhetorical abuse. He privately entertained his own opinion of the long-dead tyrant. On his first trip to London at the age of six, Mallory had once seen the Duke of Wellington—passing in his gilded carriage in the street, with a clopping, jingling escort of armed cavalry. And the boy Mallory had been vastly impressed—not simply by that famous hook-nosed face, high-collared and whiskered, groomed and stem and silent—but by his own father's awe-struck mix of fear and pleasure at the Duke's passage.

Some faint tang of that childhood visit to London—in 1831, the first year of the Time of Troubles, the last of England's old regime—still clung to Mallory whenever he saw the capital. Some few months later, in Lewes, his father had cheered wildly when news came of Wellington's death in a bomb atrocity. But Mallory had secretly wept, stirred to bitter sorrow for a reason he could not now recall.

His seasoned judgment saw the Duke of Wellington as the outmoded, ignorant victim of an upheaval beyond his comprehension; more Charles the First than King John. Wellington had foolishly championed the interests of declining and decadent Tory blue-bloods, a class destined to be swept from power by the rising middle-class and the savant meritocrats. But Wellington himself had been no blue-blood; he had once been plain Arthur Wellesley, of rather modest Irish origin.

Further, it seemed to Mallory that as a soldier, Wellington had displayed a very praiseworthy mastery of his craft. It was only as a civil politician, and a reactionary Prime Minister, that Wellington had so thoroughly misjudged the revolutionary tenor of the coming age of industry and science. He had paid for that lack of vision with his honor, his power, and his very life.

And the England that Wellington had known and misruled, the England of Mallory's childhood, had slid through strikes, manifestos, and demonstrations, to riots, martial law, massacres, open class-warfare, and near-total anarchy. Only the Industrial Radical Party, with their boldly rational vision of a comprehensive new order, had saved England from the abyss.

But even so, Mallory thought. Even so, there should be a monument somewhere

The cabriolet rolled up Piccadilly, passing Down Street, Whitehorse Street, Half-Moon Street. Mallory thumbed through his address-book, and found Laurence Oliphant's carte-de-visite. Oliphant lived on Half-Moon Street. Mallory had half a mind to stop the cab and see if Oliphant were at home. If, unlike most posh courtiers, Oliphant perhaps rose before ten, he might have something like a bucket of ice in his household and perhaps a drop of something to open the pores. The thought of boldly interrupting Oliphant's day, and perhaps surprising him at some covert intrigue, was a pleasant one to Mallory.

But first things first. Perhaps he would try Oliphant when his errand was done.

Mallory stopped the cab at the entrance to the Burlington Arcade. The gigantic iron-framed ziggurat of Fortnum & Mason lurked across the street, amid an array of jewelers and exclusive shops. The cabbie severely overcharged him, but Mallory took no notice, being in an expansive mood. It seemed the cabbies were imposing on everyone. Some small distance down Piccadilly, another man had leapt from his cab and was arguing, in a vulgar fashion, with his driver.

Mallory had found nothing to equal shopping in its gratifying demonstration of the power of his new-found wealth. He had won his money through an act of half-mad bravado, but the secret of its origin was safe with him. London's credit-machines clicked for the vaporous profits of gambling as readily as they did for the widow's mite.

So what was it to be? This giant iron vase, with octagonal base, with eight open-work screens hanging before its fluted pedestal, giving a singular lightness and elegance to the entire object? This carved box-wood bracket with sculpted canopy, the intended mounting of a Venetian-glass thermometer? This ebony salt-cellar enriched with columns and elaborate sunken panels, accompanied by a silver salt-spoon rich with trefoils, oak-leaves, a spiral-girded stem, and the monogram of one's choice?

Within J. Walker & Co., a small but marvelously tasteful establishment amid the bay-windowed shops of the famed Arcade, Mallory discovered a gift that seemed to him perfectly apt. It was an eight-day clock which struck the quarters and hours on fine cathedral-tone bells. The timepiece, which also displayed the date, the day of the week, and the phases of the moon, was an outstanding piece of British precision craftsmanship, though naturally the elegant clock-stand would claim more admiration from the mechanically undiscerning. The stand, of the finest lacquered papier-mache inlaid with turquoise-blue glass, was surmounted by a group of large gilt figures. These represented a young and decidedly attractive Britannia, very lightly robed, admiring the progress made by Time and Science in the civilization and happiness of the people of Britain. This laudable theme was additionally illustrated by a series of seven graven scenes, revolving weekly on hidden gear-work within the clock's base.

The price was nothing less than fourteen guineas. It seemed that an item of this artistic rarity could not be denominated in simple pounds-shillings-and-pence. The crass pragmatic thought struck Mallory that the happy couple might be better served with a jingling handful of fourteen guineas. But the money would soon go, as money always did when one was young. A fine clock like this one might adorn one's home for generations.

Mallory bought the clock with cash, refusing the offer of credit, with a year to pay. The clerk, a supercilious elderly man, sweating into a starched Regency collar, demonstrated the system of cork chocks that secured the gear-work from the exigencies of travel. The clock was provided with a latched and handled case, lined with form-fitting cork under burgundy velvet.

Mallory knew he could never wedge his prize into a crowded steam-bus. He would have to hire another cabriolet, and lash the clock-case to its roof. A bothersome proposition, London being haunted by the young thieves known as dragsmen, monkey-like rascals who leapt with saw-tooth dirks onto the roofs of passing carriages, to cut the leather straps securing luggage. By the time the cab pulled to a stop, the thieves would have scampered scot-free into the depths of some evil rookery, passing their swag from hand to hand until the private contents of the victim's valise ended up in a dozen rag-and-bone shops.

Mallory lugged his purchase through the far gate of the Burlington Arcade, where the constable on guard gave him a cheery salute. Outside, in Burlington Gardens, a young man in a dented hat and shabby, greasy coat, who had been sitting apparently much at his ease on the rim of a cement planter, rose suddenly to his feet.

The shabby young man limped toward Mallory, his shoulders slumped in theatrical despair. He touched the brim of his hat, essayed a pathetic smile, and began to speak to Mallory, all in one breath. I ask your pardon sir but if you would excuse the liberty of being so addressed in the public street by one who is almost reduced to rags though it has not always been so and by no fault of my own but through ill health in my family and many unmerited sufferings it would be a great obligation sir to know the time.

The time? Could this man somehow know that Mallory had just purchased a large clock? But the shabby man paid no attention to Mallory's sudden confusion, for he continued on eagerly, in the same insinuating monotone.

Sir it is not begging that is my intention for I was brought up by the best of mothers and begging is not my trade I should not know how to follow such a trade if such were my shameful wish for I would sooner die of deprivation but sir I implore you in the name of charity to allow me the honor of acting as your porter to carry that case that burdens you for whatever price that your humanity may put upon my services—

The shabby man broke off short. He looked, wide-eyed, over Mallory's shoulder, his mouth assuming a sudden tight-clamped, pinchy look, like a seamstress biting off a thread. The shabby man took three careful steps backward, slowly, keeping Mallory between himself and whatever it was that he saw. And then he turned directly on his flapping, newspaper-stuffed heels and walked swiftly away, without any limp, into the crowded sidewalks of Cork Street.

Mallory turned at once and looked behind him. There was a tall, long-shanked, slender man behind him, with a button-nose and long side-whiskers, in a short Albert coat and plain trousers. Even as Mallory's gaze caught him, the man raised a handkerchief to his face. He coughed, in a gentlemanly way, then he dabbed at his eyes a bit. Then he seemed, with a sudden theatrical start, to have recalled something he had forgotten. He turned away, and began to wander back toward the Burlington Arcade. He had not once looked straight at Mallory.

Mallory himself took a sudden pretended interest in the clasps of his clock-case. He set his case down, bent, and looked at the bits of shiny brass with his mind racing and a chill in his spine. The rascal's handkerchief trick had given him away. Mallory recognized him now as the man he had seen by the underground station in Kensington; the coughing gent, who would not give up his cab. What's more, thought Mallory, his mind hot with insight, the coughing gent was also the rude man who'd argued with the cabbie about his fare, in Piccadilly. He had followed Mallory the whole distance from Kensington. He was trailing him.

Mallory seized his clock-case in a fierce grip and began to walk quietly down Burlington Gardens. He turned right on Old Bond Street. His nerves were tingling now, with a stalker's instinct. He had been a fool to turn and stare at first. Perhaps he had given himself away to his pursuer. Mallory did not turn and look again, but ambled along with his best pretense at leisure. He paused before a jeweler's velvet racks of cameos and bracelets and evening tiaras for Her Ladyship, and watched the street behind him, in the iron-barred shining glass.

He saw the Coughing Gent reappear almost at once. The man hung well back for the moment, careful to keep groups of London shoppers between himself and Mallory. The Coughing Gent was perhaps thirty-five, with a bit of grey in his side-whiskers, and a dark machine-stitched Albert coat that did not look like anything remarkable. His face was that of anyone in London, perhaps a little heavier, a little colder in the eyes, with a grimmer mouth beneath the button-nose.

Mallory took another turn, left up Bruton Street, his clock-case growing more awkward by the step. The shops here lacked conveniently angled glass. He doffed his hat to a pretty woman, and pretended to glance back at her ankles. The Coughing Gent was still with him.

Perhaps the Coughing Gent was a confederate of the tout and his woman. A hired ruffian; a murderer, with a derringer in the pocket of that Albert coat. Or a vial of vitriol. The hair rose at the base of Mallory's skull, anticipating the sudden impact of the assassin's bullet, the wet burning splash of corrosion.

Mallory began to walk more quickly, the case banging painfully against his leg. Into Berkeley Square, where a small steam-crane, chugging gamely between a pair of splintered plane-trees, swung a great cast-iron ball into a crumbling Georgian facade. A crowd of spectators was enjoying the sight. He joined them behind the saw-horse barricade, amid the acrid smell of ancient plaster, and sensed a moment's safety. He spied out the Coughing Gent with a sidelong glance. The fellow looked sinister enough, and anxious, having lost Mallory in the crowd for the time being. But he did not seem mad with hatred, or nerved to kill; he was glancing about among the legs of the spectators, hunting for Mallory's clock-case.

Here was a chance to lose the rascal. Mallory made a swift break down the length of the Square, taking advantage of the cover of the trees. At the Square's far end he turned down Charles Street, lined right and left with enormous eighteenth-century houses. Lordly homes, their ornate iron-work hung with modern coats-of-arms. Behind him a sumptuous gurney emerged from its carriage-house, giving Mallory the chance to stop, and turn, and study the street.

His gambit had failed. The Coughing Gent was mere yards behind, a bit winded perhaps and red-faced in the sullen heat, but not deceived. He was waiting for Mallory to move again, careful not to look at him. Instead, he gazed with apparent longing at the entrance of a public-house named I Am the Only Running Footman. It occurred to Mallory to double back and enter the Running Footman, where he might lose the Coughing Gent in the crowd. Or perhaps he could leap, at the last moment, onto a departing omnibus—if he could cram his precious case aboard.

But Mallory saw little real hope in these expedients. This fellow had the firm advantage of the terrain and all the sneaking tricks of the London criminal. Mallory felt like a lumbering Wyoming bison. He trudged ahead with the heavy clock. His hand ached; he was becoming weary

At the foot of Queens Way, a dragline and two excavators were wreaking progressive havoc in the ruins of Shepherd Market. A hoarding surrounded the site, the boards cracked and knotholed by eager spectators. Kerchief-headed women and chaw-spitting costermongers, displaced from their customary sites, had set up a last-ditch rag-shop just outside the fence. Mallory walked down the line of ill-smelling oysters and limp vegetables. At the end of the hoarding, some accident of planning had left a narrow alleyway; dusty planks to one side, crumbled brick to the other. Rank weeds sprouted between piss-damp ancient cobbles. Mallory peered in as a bonneted crone arose from a squat, adjusting her skirts. She walked past him without a word. Mallory touched his hat.

Heaving the case above his head, he set it gently atop the wall of mossy brick. He shored it up securely with a chunk of decayed mortar, then placed his hat beside it.

He flattened his back against the wall of planks.

The Coughing Gent appeared. Mallory lunged for the man, and punched him in the pit of the belly with all his strength. The man doubled over with a spit and a wheeze, and Mallory clouted him with a short left to the side of the jaw. The man's hat flew off, and he tumbled to his knees.

Mallory grabbed the back of the villain's Albert coat and flung him hard against the bricks. The man rebounded, sprawled headlong, and lay gasping, his whiskered face smeared with filth. Mallory snatched him up two-handed, by the throat and lapel. Who are you!

Help, the man croaked feebly, murder!

Mallory dragged the man three yards down the alley. Don't play the fool with me, you blackguard! Why are you following me? Who paid you? What's your name?

The man clawed desperately at Mallory's wrist. Let me go  His coat had flown open. Mallory glimpsed the brown leather of a shoulder-holster and reached at once for the weapon in it.

It was not a gun. It came out in his hand like a long oiled snake. A truncheon, with a braided leather handle and a thick black shaft of India-rubber, flattened at the end to a swollen tip like a shoehorn's. It had a spring-steel whippiness, as if it were built around a coil of iron.

Mallory brandished the ugly device, which felt as if it could easily break bones. The Coughing Gent cowered before him. Answer my questions!

A bolt of wet lightning blasted the back of Mallory's head. His senses almost left him; he felt himself fall, but caught himself against the filthy cobblestones with arms as numb and heavy as legs of mutton. A second blow fell, but glancingly, across his shoulder. He rolled back and snarled—a thick, barking sound, a cry he had never heard from his own throat. He kicked out at his attacker, somehow caught the man's shin. The man hopped back, cursing.

Mallory had lost the truncheon. He lurched up, scrambling, into a giddy crouch. The second man was portly and small. He wore a round derby hat, mashed down almost to his eyebrows. He stood over the outstretched legs of the Coughing Gent and made a menacing slash at Mallory with a sausage-like leather cosh.

Blood coursed down Mallory's neck as a wave of nauseated dizziness struck. He felt he might faint at any moment, and animal instinct told him that if he fell now, he would surely be beaten to death.

He turned and fled the alley on wobbling legs. His head seemed to rattle and squeak, as if the sutures of his skull had ruptured. Red mist swirled like oil before his eyes.

He tottered a short way down the street, and rounded a corner, gasping. He propped himself against a wall, hands braced on his knees. A respectable man and woman passed him, and stared in vague distaste. With his nose running, his mouth clogged with nausea, he glared back at them, feebly defiant. He sensed somehow that if the bastards smelled his blood they would surely tear him down.

Time passed. More Londoners strolled past him, with looks of indifference, curiosity, faint disapproval, thinking him drunk or sick. Mallory peered through his tears at the building across the street, at the neatly enameled cast-iron sign on its corner.

Half-Moon Street. Half-Moon Street, where Oliphant lived.

Mallory felt in his pocket for his field-book. It was still there, the familiar touch of its sturdy leather binding like a blessing to him. With trembling fingers, he found Oliphant's card.

Once he had reached the address, at the far end of Half-Moon Street, he was no longer weaving on his feet. The ugly giddiness in his skull had changed to a painful throbbing.

Oliphant lived in a Georgian mansion, divided for modern renters. The ground floor had an elaborate iron railing and a curtained bay-window commanding the peaceful vista of Green Park. It was altogether a pleasantly civilized place, entirely unsuitable for a man who was aching, stunned, and dripping blood. Mallory pounded fiercely with the elephant-headed knocker.

A man-servant opened the door. He looked Mallory up and down. May I help you? Oh, my word. He turned, raised his voice to a shout. Mr. Oliphant!

Mallory tottered into the entrance hall, all elegant tile and waxed wainscoting. Oliphant appeared almost at once. In spite of the hour, he was formally dressed, with the smallest of bow-ties and a chrysanthemum boutonniere.

Oliphant seemed to grasp the situation with a single keen-eyed glance. Bligh! Go at once to the kitchen; fetch brandy from cook. A basin of water. And some clean towels.

Bligh, the man-servant, vanished. Oliphant stepped to the open door, glanced warily up and down the street, then shut and locked the door securely. Taking Mallory's arm, he guided him into the parlor, where Mallory lowered himself wearily on a piano-bench.

So you've been attacked, Oliphant said. Set upon from behind. A cowardly ambush, by the look of it.

How bad is it? I can't see.

A blow from a blunt instrument. The skin is broken and you have a considerable bruise. It's bled rather freely, but is clotting now.

Is it serious?

I've seen worse. Oliphant's tone was ironically cheerful. But it's quite spoilt that handsome jacket of yours. I'm afraid.

They stalked me all through Piccadilly, Mallory said. I didn't see the second one, until it was too late. He sat up suddenly. Damn! My clock! A clock, a wedding gift. I left it in an alleyway by Shepherd Market. Those rascals will have stolen it!

Bligh reappeared, with towels and basin. He was shorter and older than his master, clean-shaven and thick-necked, with bulging brown eyes. His hairy wrists were thick as a collier's. He and Oliphant shared an air of easy respect, as though the man were a trusted family retainer. Oliphant dabbed a towel in the basin and stepped behind Mallory. Be quite still, please.

My clock, Mallory repeated.

Oliphant sighed. Bligh, do you think you could see to this gentleman's mislaid property? There's a degree of danger, of course.

Yes, sir, Bligh said stolidly. And the guests, sir?

Oliphant seemed to think it over, dabbing wetly at the back of Mallory's skull. Why don't you take the guests with you, Bligh? I'm sure they'd enjoy the outing. Take them out the back way. Try not to create too much of a public spectacle.

What shall I tell them, sir?

Tell them the truth, of course! Tell them that a friend of the household has been assaulted by foreign agents. But tell them they mustn't kill anyone. And if they don't find this clock of Dr. Mallory's, they mustn't think it a reflection on their abilities. Make a joke of it if you must, but don't allow them to feel they've lost prestige.

I understand, sir, Bligh said, and left.

Sorry to impose, Mallory muttered.

Nonsense. It's what we're here for. Oliphant offered Mallory two fingers of very good brandy, in a crystal tumbler.

With the brandy, the dry-throated shock oozed out of Mallory, leaving him in pain, but far less numb and harried. You were right and I was wrong, he declared. They were stalking me like an animal! They were no common ruffians; they meant me harm. I'm sure of it.

Texians?

Londoners. A tall cove with side-whiskers, and a little fat one in a derby hat.

Hirelings. Oliphant dabbled a towel in the basin. You could do with a stitch or two, I think. Shall I summon a doctor? Or do you trust me to do it? I've done a bit of surgeon's work, in rough country.

So have I, Mallory said. Pray go ahead if you think it necessary.

He had another gulp of Oliphant's brandy while the man fetched needle and thread. Then Mallory doffed his coat, clenched his jaw, and stared at the blue floral wallpaper while Oliphant deftly pierced the torn skin and sutured it. Not a bad job, Oliphant said, pleased. Stay out of unwholesome effluvia and you'll likely escape without a fever.

All London's an effluvium today. This beastly weather I don't trust doctors, do you? They don't know what they're talking about.

Unlike diplomats, or Catastrophists? Oliphant's charming smile made it impossible for Mallory to take offense. Mallory picked his jacket from the piano-bench. Bloodstains matted its collar. Now what? Shall I go to the police?

That's your privilege, of course, Oliphant said, though I would trust to your patriotic discretion to leave certain matters unmentioned.

Certain matters such as Lady Ada Byron?

Oliphant frowned. To speculate wildly about the Prime Minister's daughter would. I'm afraid, be a very severe indiscretion.

I see. And what about my gun-running for the Royal Society's Commission on Free Trade, then? I make the unfounded assumption that the Commission's scandals differ from Lady Ada's.

Well, said Oliphant. Gratifying as it would be to me personally to see your Commission's blunders publicly exposed, I fear that entire business must remain sub-rosa—in the interests of the British nation.

I see. What exactly is left to me to say to the police, then?

Oliphant smiled thinly. That you were struck on the head by an unnamed ruffian for unknown reasons.

This is ridiculous, Mallory snapped. Aren't you Government mandarins good for anything? This isn't some game of parlor charades, you know! I identified that female fiend who helped hold Lady Ada captive! Her name is—

Florence Bartlett, Oliphant said. And pray keep your voice down.

How did you—? Mallory stopped. Your friend Mr. Wakefield, is it? I suppose he watched all my business at the Statistics Bureau, and dashed off at once to tell you everything.

It's Wakefield's business, however tedious, to watch the business of his own blessed Engines, Oliphant said calmly. I was expecting you to tell me, actually—now that you know that you were enticed by an authentic femme fatale. But you don't seem eager to share your information, sir.

Mallory grunted.

This is no matter for the common police, Oliphant said. I told you earlier that you should have special protection. Now, I'm afraid I must insist.

Bloody hell, Mallory muttered.

I've the very man for this assignment. Inspector Ebenezer Fraser, of the Bow Street Special Branch. The very Special Branch, so you mustn't say that too loudly; but you'll find Inspector Fraser—or Mister Fraser, as he prefers to be called in public—to be most capable, most understanding, and very discreet. I know you'll be safe in Fraser's hands—and I cannot tell you what a relief that will be to me.

A door shut in the back of the house. There were footsteps, scrapings and clinkings, strange voices. Then Bligh reappeared.

My clock! Mallory cried. Thank heaven!

We found it atop a wall, with a bit of brick propping it up, rather hidden away, Bligh said, setting down the case. Scarcely a scratch on it. I surmise the ruffians cached it there, for later looting, sir.

Oliphant nodded, with an arched eyebrow at Mallory. Fine work, Bligh.

And then there was this, sir. Bligh produced a trampled topper.

It's that rascal's, Mallory declared. The Coughing Gent's crushed hat had been liberally soaked in a puddle of stale piss, though no one saw fit to mention this unspeakable fact.

Sorry to miss your own hat, sir, Bligh said. Likely stolen by some street-arab.

Oliphant, with the faintest wince of involuntary distaste, examined the mined topper, turning it over and inverting the lining. No maker's mark.

Mallory glanced at it. Engine-made. From Moses & Son, I should say. About two years old.

Well. Oliphant blinked. I presume that evidence rules out any foreigner. A London veteran, surely. A user of cheap macassar oil, but a man of enough cranial capacity to have a certain cunning. Put it in the rubbish, Bligh.

Yes, sir. Bligh left.

Mallory patted the clock-case with deep satisfaction. Your man Bligh has done me a great service. Do you think he would object to a gratuity?

Most decidedly, Oliphant said.

Mallory felt the gaffe. He gritted his teeth. What about these guests of yours? Might I be permitted to thank them?

Oliphant smiled with abandon. Why not!

He led Mallory into the dining room. The mahogany legs had been detached from Oliphant's dining-table, and the great polished surface now sat on its corners of carven gingerbread, mere inches above the floor. Five Asian men sat about it, in cross-legged alien dignity five sober men in their stocking feet, wearing tailored evening-suits from Savile Row. All the men sported tall silk toppers, tugged low over their clippered heads. Their hair was very short and very dark.

And a woman was with them as well, kneeling at the table's foot. She had a look of mask-like composure and a silky black wealth of hair. She was wrapped in some voluminous native garb, bright with swallows and maple-leaves.

Doctor Edward Mallory san o goshokai shimasu, Oliphant said. The men rose with peculiar grace; rocking back a bit, sliding one foot beneath them, and coming up quite suddenly to a supple-legged stance, as if they were ballet dancers.

These gentlemen are in the service of His Imperial Majesty the Mikado of Japan, Oliphant said. This is Mr. Matsuki Koan, Mr. Mori Arinori, Mr. Fusukawa Yukichi, Mr. Kanaye Nagasawa, Mr. Hisanobu Sameshima. The men bowed from the hips, each in turn.

Oliphant had made no attempt to introduce the woman; she sat with expressionless rigidity, as if secretly resenting the gaze of an Englishman. Mallory thought it wise not to mention the matter, or pay her much attention. Instead, he turned to Oliphant. Japanese, are they? You speak the lingo, do you?

A diplomatic smattering.

Would you please thank them for so gallantly fetching my clock, then?

We understand you. Dr. Marori, said one of the Japanese. Mallory had immediately forgotten their impossible names, but thought that this one might be called Yukichi. It is honor to us to assist British friend of Mr. Laurence Oliphant, to whom our sovereign has expressed obligation. Mr. Yukichi bowed again.

Mallory was utterly at sea. Thank you for that courteous speech, sir. You're a very well-spoken gentleman, I must say. I'm not a diplomat myself, but I do thank you sincerely. Very kind of all of you 

The Japanese conferred among themselves. We hope you are not badly hurt by barbaric assault on your British person by foreigners, said Mr. Yukichi.

No, Mallory said.

We did not see your enemy, nor any rude or violent person. Mr. Yukichi's tone was mild, but his glinting eyes left Mallory little doubt as to what Yukichi and his friends would have done had they met such a ruffian. As a group, the five Japanese had a refined, scholarly air; two were wearing rimless spectacles, and one had a ribboned monocle and dandyish yellow gloves. But they were all young and deft and sturdy, and their toppers were perched on their heads like Viking helmets.

Oliphant's long legs buckled suddenly beneath him, and he sat at the head of the table with a smile. Mallory sat too, his knee-caps popping loudly. The Japanese followed Oliphant's lead, quickly tucking themselves into the same positions of arid dignity. The woman had not moved so much as an inch.

Under the circumstances, Oliphant mused, dreadful hot day, a tiring foray after enemies of the realm—a small libation is in order. He lifted a brass bell from the table and rang it. So, let's get friendly, eh? Nani o onomi ni narimasa ka?

The Japanese conferred, their eyes widening, with happy nods and sharp grunts of approval. Uisuki

Whiskey, an excellent choice, said Oliphant.

Bligh arrived momentarily, with a trolley of liquor bottles. We're low on ice, sir.

What's that, Bligh?

Iceman wouldn't sell cook but a bit. Price has trebled since last week!

Well, ice wouldn't fit into the doll's bottle, anyway, said Oliphant lightly, just as if that remark made sense. Now, Dr. Mallory, pay close heed. Mr. Matsuki Koan, who happens to hail from the very advanced province of Satsuma, was just demonstrating to us one of the marvels of Japanese craft—who was the craftsman again, Mr. Matsuki?

She is made by sons of Hosokawa family, said Mr. Matsuki, bowing in place. Our lord—Satsuma daimyo—is patron.

I believe Mr. Matsuki will do the honors, Bligh, said Oliphant. Bligh handed Mr. Matsuki a whiskey bottle; Mr. Matsuki began to decant it into an elegant ceramic jug, at the right hand of the Japanese woman. She made no response. Mallory began to wonder if she were ill, or paralyzed. Then Mr. Matsuki fitted the little jug into her right hand with a sharp wooden click. He rose, and fetched a gilded crank-handle. He stuck the device into the small of her back and began to twist it, his face expressionless. A high-pitched coiling sound emerged from the woman's innards.

She's a dummy! Mallory blurted.

More a marionette, actually, Oliphant said. The proper term is 'automaton,' I believe.

Mallory drew a breath. I see! Like one of those Jacquot-Droz toys, or Vaucanson's famous duck, eh? He laughed. It was now obvious at a glance that the mask-like face, half-shrouded by the elegant black hair, was in fact carved and painted wood. That blow must have addled my brains. Heaven, what a marvel.

Every hair in her wig put in by hand, Oliphant said. She's a royal gift, for Her Britannic Majesty. Though I imagine the Prince Consort, and especially young Alfred, might take quite a fancy to her as well.

The automaton began pouring drinks. There was a hinge within her robed elbow, and a second in her wrist; she poured whiskey with a gentle slither of cables and a muted wooden clicking. She moves much like an Engine-guided Maudsley lathe, Mallory noted. Is that where they got the plans?

No, she's entirely native, said Oliphant. Mr. Matsuki was passing little ceramic cups of whiskey down the table. Not a bit of metal in her—all bamboo, and braided horsehair, and whalebone springs. The Japanese have known how to make such dolls for many years—karakuri, they call them.

Mallory sipped his whiskey. Scotch single-malt. He was already a bit squiffed from Oliphant's brandy—now the sight of the doll made him feel as if he had blundered into a Christmas pantomine. Does she walk? he asked. Play the flute perhaps? Or any of that business?

No, she simply pours, said Oliphant. With either hand, though.

Mallory felt the eyes of the Japanese fixed on him. It was clear that the doll was no particular marvel to them. They wanted to know what he, a Briton, thought of her. They wanted to know if he was impressed.

She is very impressive, he blurted. Especially so, given the primitive nature of Asia!

Japan is the Britain of Asia, Oliphant said.

We know she is not much, said Mr. Yukichi, his eyes glinting.

No, she's a marvel, truly, Mallory insisted. Why, you could charge admission.

We know she is not much, compared to your great British machines. It is as Mr. Oliphant says—we are your younger brothers in this world.

We will learn, said another Japanese, speaking for the first time. He was likely the one called Arinori. We have great obligation to Britain! Britain opened our ports with the iron fleet. We have awaked, and learnt great lesson you have teached us. We have destroyed our Shogun and his backward bakufu. Mikado will lead us now, in great new progress age.

We will be allies with you, said Mr. Yukichi, nobly. The Britain of Asia will bring civilization and enlightenment to all Asian peoples.

That's very laudable of you, said Mallory. It's a bit of a hard slog, though, civilization, building an empire. Takes several centuries, you know 

We learn everything from you now, said Mr. Arinori. His face was flushed; the whiskey and heat seemed to have kindled a fire in him. We build great schools and navies, like you. In Choshu, we have an Engine! We will buy more Engines. We will build our own Engines!

Mallory chuckled. The queer little foreigners seemed so young, so idealistic—intelligent, and above all sincere. He felt quite sorry for them. Well! It's a fine dream, young sir, and does you credit! But it's no simple matter. You see, we in Britain have devoted great effort to those Engines—you might well call that the central aim of our nation! Our savants have worked on Enginery for decades now. For you, in a few short years, to achieve what we have done

We will make whatever sacrifice is necessary, said Mr. Yukichi, calmly.

There are other ways to improve the homeland of your race, Mallory said. But what you propose is simply impossible!

We will make whatever sacrifice is necessary.

Mallory glanced at Oliphant, who sat with a fixed smile, watching the wind-up girl filling china cups. Perhaps the faint chill in the air was only Mallory's imagination. Yet he felt he had blundered somehow.

There was silence, broken only by the ticking automaton. Mallory got to his feet, his head pounding. I appreciate your kindness, Mr. Oliphant. And the help of your guests, of course. But I can't stay, you know. Very pleasant here, but press of business

You're quite sure? Oliphant asked cordially.

Yes.

Oliphant lifted his voice. Bligh! Send cook's boy to fetch Dr. Mallory a cab.


Mallory's night passed in sodden fatigue. He woke from a confused dream, in which he argued Catastrophism with the Coughing Gent, to hear repeated knocking at his door.

A moment! He flung his bare legs from bed, yawned groggily, and tenderly cradled the back of his skull. His bruise had bled a bit in the night, leaving a pinkish stain on the pillow-slip, but the swelling was down and he did not feel feverish. Likely it was the therapeutic work of Oliphant's excellent liquor.

Pulling a nightshirt over his perspiring nudity, he wrapped himself in a dressing-gown and opened the door. The Palace concierge, an Irishman named Kelly, stood in the hall with a pair of glum-faced chars. They were equipped with mops, galvanized buckets, black rubber funnels, and a push-cart crowded with stoppered jeroboams.

What is the time, Kelly?

Nine of the clock, sir. Kelly entered, sucking his yellow teeth. The women trundled in after him with their cart. Gaudy paper labels declared each ceramic bottle to contain Condy's Patent Oxygenating Deodorizer, One Imp. Gallon.

What's all this?

Manganate of soda, sir, to see to the Palace plumbing. We plan to flush every closet. Clear the Palace pipes out, straight down to the main drains.

Mallory adjusted his robe. It embarrassed him to appear with his feet and ankles bared before the charwomen. Kelly, it won't do a dashed bit of good if you flush your pipes straight to Hell. This is metropolitan London, in a wretched hot summer. Even the Thames stinks.

Have to do something, sir, Kelly said. Our guests are complaining, most vigorously. I can't say as I blame them, sir.

The women funneled a jug of the decoction, which was bright purple, into the bowl of Mallory's water-closet. The deodorizer emitted a piercing ammoniacal reek, far more vile in its own way than the lingering taint in his rooms. They scrubbed wearily at the porcelain, sneezing, until Kelly pulled the cistern-chain with a magisterial gesture.

Then they left, and Mallory dressed. He checked his notebook. The afternoon's schedule was crowded, but the morning had only a single appointment. Mallory had already learned that Disraeli's tardiness made it best to allot him half the day. With luck, he might find time to take his jacket in for French cleaning, or have a barber trim the clots from his hair.

When he went down to the dining-room, two other late breakfasters were chatting over tea. One was a cabinet-man named Belshaw, the other a museum underling whose name might be Sydenham. Mallory couldn't quite recall.

Belshaw looked up as Mallory entered the room. Mallory nodded civilly. Belshaw gazed back at him with barely concealed astonishment. Mallory walked past the two men, taking his customary seat beneath the gilt gas chandelier. Belshaw and Sydenham began to talk in low, urgent tones.

Mallory was nonplussed. He had never been formally introduced to Belshaw, but could the man possibly resent a simple nod? Now Sydenham, his pudgy face gone pale, was casting sidelong glances at Mallory. Mallory wondered if his fly was open. It was not. But the men's eyes goggled with apparently genuine alarm. Had his wound opened, was his hair dripping blood down his neck? It did not seem so

Mallory gave his breakfast order to a waiter; the servant's face, too, was wooden, as if the choice of kippers and eggs were a grave indiscretion.

Mallory, growing steadily more confused, had a mind to confront Belshaw on the matter, and began to rehearse a little speech. But Belshaw and Sydenham rose suddenly, quitting their tea, and left the dining-room. Mallory ate his breakfast with grim deliberation, determined not to let the incident upset him.

He went to the front desk to fetch his basket of mail. The usual desk-clerk was not on duty; taken down with a catarrh of the lungs, his replacement said. Mallory retired with his basket to his customary seat in the library. There were five of his Palace colleagues present, gathered in a corner of the room, where they were anxiously conversing. As Mallory glanced up, he thought he caught them staring at him—but this was nonsense.

Mallory sorted through his correspondence with desultory interest, his head aching slightly and his mind already drifting. There was a tedious burden of necessary professional correspondence, and the usual tiresome freight of admiring missives and begging-letters. Perhaps the engagement of a personal secretary might in fact be unavoidable.

Struck by an odd inspiration, Mallory wondered if young Mr. Tobias of the Central Statistics Bureau might not be just the man for this post. Perhaps an offer of alternate employment would increase the fellow's daring in the office, for there was much at the Bureau that Mallory longed to peruse. The file on Lady Ada, for instance, should such a fabulous item exist. Or the slippery Mr. Oliphant, with his ready smiles and vague assurances. Or Lord Charles Lyell, the medal-heavy savant chief of the Uniformitarian faction.

These three worthies were likely well above his reach, Mallory thought. But he might well ferret out a bit of data on Peter Foulke a sinister rascal whose web of underhanded intrigue was ever more manifest.

He would have it all out somehow; Mallory felt quite sure of that, as he shuffled through his mail-basket. The whole occulted business would slowly emerge, like bones chipped from their bed of shale. He had glimpsed the closeted skeletons of the Rad elite. Now, given time and a chance to work, he would wrench the mystery whole from its stony matrix.

His attention was caught by a most unusual packet. It was of non-standard dimensions, rather blocky and square, and it bore a colorful set of French express-stamps. The ivory-yellow envelope, astonishingly slick and stiff, was of a most unusual water-proof substance, something like isinglass. Mallory took out his Sheffield knife, selected the smallest of several blades, and worried the thing open.

The interior bore a single French Engine-card, of the Napoleon gauge. Mallory, with growing alarm, shook the card free, onto the table-top. He did this with some difficulty, for the slick interior of the envelope was queerly damp. It was dewy with a chemical moisture, giving off an increasingly virulent stench as it was exposed to air.

The card, a blank without holes, bore a neat block of tiny black print, all in capitals.



TO DR. EDWARD MALLORY, PALACE OF PALEONTOLOGY, LONDON YOU ARE IN GUILTY POSSESSION OF A PROPERTY STOLEN AT EPSOM. YOU WILL RETURN THIS PROPERTY TO US, WHOLE AND COMPLETE, FOLLOWING THE ORDERS GIVEN YOU IN THE PERSONAL NOTICES COLUMNS OF THE LONDON DAILY EXPRESS. UNTIL WE RECEIVE THIS PROPERTY, YOU WILL SUFFER A VARIETY OF DELIBERATE PUNISHMENTS, CULMINATING, IF NECESSARY, IN YOUR ENTIRE AND UTTER DESTRUCTION. EDWARD MALLORY WE KNOW YOUR NUMBER, YOUR IDENTITY, YOUR HISTORY, AND YOUR AMBITIONS; WE ARE FULLY COGNIZANT OF YOUR EVERY WEAKNESS. RESISTANCE IS USELESS; SWIFT AND COMPLETE SUBMISSION IS YOUR ONLY HOPE. CAPTAIN SWING


Mallory sat in astonishment, memory rushing vividly upon him. Wyoming again, a morning when he'd risen from his camp-bed to find a rattlesnake dozing in his body-heat. He had felt the serpent squirming below his back in the depths of his sleep, but had drowsily ignored it. Here now was the sudden scaly proof.

He snatched the card up, examining it minutely. Camphorated cellulose, damp with something pungent—and the tiny black letters were beginning to fade. The flexible card had grown hot in his fingers. He dropped it at once, choking back a yelp of surprise. The card lay warping on the table-top, then began flaking into layers thinner than the finest onion-skin, while browning nastily at the edges. A feather of yellowish smoke began to rise, and Mallory realized that the thing was about to burst into flame.

He snatched hastily within the basket, came up with the latest thick grey issue of the Quart. Jrl. Geol. Soc., and swiftly swatted the card. After two sharp blows, it came apart into a thready curling mess, half-mixed with the blistered finish of the table-top.

Mallory slit open a begging-letter, tossed the contents out unread, and swept the ash into the envelope, with the sharp-edged spine of the geological journal. The table did not seem too badly damaged

Dr. Mallory?

Mallory looked up, with a guilt-stricken start, into the face of a stranger. The man, a tall and clean-shaven Londoner, very plainly dressed, with a gaunt, unsmiling look, stood across the library table from Mallory, papers and a notebook in one hand.

A very poor specimen, Mallory said, in a sudden ecstasy of impromptu deception. Pickled in camphor! A dreadful technique! He folded the envelope and slid it in his pocket.

The stranger silently offered a carte-de-visite.

Ebenezer Fraser's card bore his name, a telegram-number, and a small embossed Seal of State. Nothing else. The other side offered a stippled portrait with the look of stone-faced gravity that seemed the man's natural expression.

Mallory rose to offer his hand, then realized that his fingers were tainted with acid. He bowed instead, sat at once, and wiped his hand furtively on the back of his trouser-leg. The skin of thumb and forefinger felt dessicated, as if dipped in formaldehyde.

I hope I find you well, sir, Fraser murmured, seating himself across the table. Recovered from yesterday's attack?

Mallory glanced down the length of the library. The other patrons were still clumped together at the far side of the room, and seemed very curious indeed about his antics and Fraser's sudden appearance.

A trifle, Mallory hedged. Might happen to anyone, in London.

Fraser lifted one dark eyebrow, by a fraction.

Sorry my mishap should cause you to take trouble, Mr. Fraser.

No trouble, sir. Fraser opened a leather-bound notebook and produced a reservoir-pen from within his plain, Quakerish jacket. Some questions?

Truth to tell. I'm rather pressed for time at the moment—

Fraser silenced him with an impassive look. Been here three hours, sir, awaiting your convenience.

Mallory began a fumbling apology.

Fraser ignored him. I witnessed something quite curious outside, at six o'clock this morning, sir. A young news-boy, crying to the world that Leviathan Mallory was arrested for murder.

Me? Edward Mallory?

Fraser nodded.

I don't understand. Why should any news-boy cry any such damnable lie?

Sold a deal of his papers, Fraser said drily. Bought one meself.

What on earth did this paper have to say about me?

Not a word of news about any Mallory, Fraser said. You may see for yourself. He dropped a folded newspaper on the table-top a London Daily Express.

Mallory set the newspaper carefully atop his basket. Some wicked prank, he suggested, his throat dry. The street-arabs here are nerved for anything 

When I stepped out again, the little rascal had hooked it, Fraser said. But a deal of your colleagues heard that news-boy crying his tale. Been the talk of the place all morning.

I see, Mallory said. That accounts for a certain well! He cleared his throat.

Fraser watched him impassively. You'd best see this now, sir. He took a folded document from his notebook, opened it, and slid it across the polished mahogany.

An Engine-printed daguerreotype. A dead man, full length on a slab, a bit of linen tucked about his loins. The picture had been taken in a morgue. The corpse had been knifed open from belly to sternum with a single tremendous ripping thrust. The skin of chest and legs and bulging belly was marble pale, in eerie contrast to the deeply sunburnt hands, the florid face.

It was Francis Rudwick.

There was a caption at the bottom of the picture. 'A Scientific Autopsy', it read. 'The batrachian subject is pithed and opened in a catastrophic dissection. First in a Series.'

God in Heaven! Mallory said.

Official police morgue record, Fraser said. Seems it fell into the hands of a mischief-maker.

Mallory stared at it in horror-struck amazement. What can it mean?

Fraser readied his pen. What is 'batrachian,' sir?

From the Greek, Mallory blurted. Batrachos, amphibian. Frogs and toads, mostly. He struggled for words. Once—years ago, in a debate—I said that his theories Rudwick's geological theories, you know

I heard the story this morning, sir. It seems well-known among your colleagues. Fraser flipped pages in his notebook. You said to Mr. Rudwick 'The course of Evolution does not conform to the batrachian sluggishness of your intellect.'  He paused. Fellow did look a bit froggy, didn't he, sir?

It was in public debate at Cambridge, Mallory said slowly. Our blood was up 

Rudwick claimed you were 'mad as a hatter,'  Fraser mused. Seems you took that remark very ill.

Mallory flushed. He had no right to say that, with his gentry airs—

You were enemies.

Yes, but— Mallory wiped his forehead. You can't believe I had anything to do with this!

Not by your own intention, I am sure, Fraser said. But I believe you're a Sussex man, sir? Town called Lewes?

Yes?

Seems that some scores of these pictures have been mailed from the Lewes postal office.

Mallory was stunned. Scores of them?

Mailed far and wide to your Royal Society colleagues, sir. Anonymously.

Christ in Heaven, Mallory said, they mean to destroy me!

Fraser said nothing.

Mallory stared at the morgue picture. Suddenly the simple human pity of the sight struck him, with terrible force. Poor damned Rudwick! Look what they've done to him!

Fraser watched him politely.

He was one of us! Mallory blurted, stung into angry sincerity. He was no theorist, but a damned fine bone-digger. My God, think of his poor family!

Fraser made a note. Family—must inquire into that. Very likely they've been told you murdered him.

But I was in Wyoming when Rudwick was killed. Everyone knows that!

A wealthy man might hire the business done.

I'm not a wealthy man.

Fraser said nothing.

I wasn't, Mallory said, not then

Fraser leafed deliberately through his notebook.

I won the money gambling.

Fraser showed mild interest.

My colleagues have noticed how I spend it, Mallory concluded, with a chill sensation. And wondered whence the money came. And they talk about me behind my back, eh?

Envy does set tongues wagging, sir.

Mallory felt a sudden giddy dread. Menace filled the air like a cloud of wasps. After a moment, in Fraser's tactful silence, Mallory rallied himself. He shook his head slowly, set his jaw. He would not be mazed or driven. There was work to do. There was evidence at hand. Mallory bent forward with a scowl, and studied the picture fiercely.  'First of a series,' this says. This is a threat, Mr. Fraser. It implies similar murders to follow. 'A catastrophic dissection.' This refers to our scientific quarrel—as if he'd died because of that!

Savants take their quarrels very seriously, Fraser said.

Can you mean to say that my colleagues believe I sent this? That I hire assassins like a Machiavel; that I am a dangerous maniac who boasts of murdering his rivals?

Fraser said nothing.

My God, Mallory said. What am I to do?

My superiors have set this case within my purview, Fraser said formally. I must ask you to trust in my discretion, Dr. Mallory.

But what am I to do about the damage to my reputation? Am I to go to every man in this building, and beg his pardon, and tell him tell him I am not some hellish ghoul?

Government will not allow a prominent savant to be harassed in this manner, Fraser assured him quietly. Tomorrow, in Bow Street, the Commissioner of Police will issue a statement to the Royal Society, declaring you a victim of malicious slander, and innocent of all suspicion in the Rudwick affair.

Mallory rubbed his beard. Will that help, you think?

If necessary, we will issue a public statement to the daily newspapers, as well.

But might not such publicity arouse more suspicion against me?

Fraser shifted a bit in his library chair. Dr. Mallory, my Bureau exists to destroy conspiracies. We are not without experience. We are not without our resources. We will not be trumped by some shabby clique of dark-lanternists. We mean to have the lot of these plotters, branch and root, and we will do it sooner, sir, if you are frank with me, and tell me all you know.

Mallory sat back in his chair. It is in my nature to be frank, Mr. Fraser. But it is a dark and scandalous story.

You need not fear for my sensibilities.

Mallory looked about at the mahogany shelves, the bound journals, the leather-bound texts and outsized atlases. Suspicion hung in the air like a burning taint. After yesterday's street-assault, the Palace had seemed a welcome fortress to him, but now it felt like a badger's bolthole. This ain't the place to tell it, Mallory muttered.

No, sir, Fraser agreed. But you should go about your scientific business, same as always. Put a bold face on matters, and likely your enemies will think their stratagems failed.

The advice seemed sound to Mallory. At the least, it was action. He rose at once to his feet. Go about my daily business, eh? Yes, I should think so. Quite proper.

Fraser rose as well. I will accompany you, sir, with your permission. I trust we will put a sharp end to your troubles.

You might not think so, if you knew the whole damned business, Mallory grumbled.

Mr. Oliphant has informed me on the matter.

I doubt it, Mallory grunted. He has closed his eyes to the worst of it.

I'm no bloody politician, Fraser remarked, in his same mild tone. Shall we be on our way, sir?


Outside the Palace, the London sky was a canopy of yellow haze.

It hung above the city in gloomy grandeur, like some storm-fleshed jellied man-o'-war. Its tentacles, the uprising filth of the city's smokestacks, twisted and fluted like candle-smoke in utter stillness, to splash against a lidded ceiling of glowering cloud. The invisible sun cast a drowned and watery light.

Mallory studied the street around him, a London summer morning made strange by the eerie richness of the sooty amber light.

Mr. Fraser, you're a London man born and bred, I take it.

Yes, sir.

Have you ever seen weather like this?

Fraser considered, squinting at the sky. Not since I were a lad, sir, when the coal-fogs were bad. But the Rads built taller stacks. Nowadays it blows off into the counties. He paused. Mostly.

Mallory considered the flat clouds, fascinated. He wished he'd spent more time on the doctrines of pneumo-dynamics. This pot-lid of static cloud displayed an unhealthy lack of natural turbulence, as though the dynamical systematics of the atmosphere had stagnated somehow. The stinking underground, the droughty, sewage-thickened Thames, and now this. Doesn't seem as hot as yesterday, he muttered.

The gloom, sir.

The streets were such a crush as only London could produce. The omnibuses and cabriolets were all taken, every intersection jammed with rattle-traps and dogcarts, with cursing drivers and panting, black-nostriled horses. Steam-gurneys chugged sluggishly by, many lowing rubber-tired freight-cars loaded with provisions. It seemed the gentry's summer exodus from London was becoming a rout. Mallory could see the sense in it.

It was a long walk to Fleet Street, and his appointment with Disraeli. It seemed best to try the train and endure the Stink.

But the British Brotherhood of Sappers and Miners stood on strike at the entrance to Gloucester Road Station. They had set up pickets and banners across the walk, and were heaping sandbags, like an army of occupation. A large crowd looked on, keeping good order; they did not seem annoyed by the strikers' boldness, but seemed curious, or cowed. Perhaps they were glad to see the underground shut; more likely they were simply afraid of the sand-hogs. The helmeted strikers had boiled up from their underground workings like so many muscular kobolds.

I don't like the look of this, Mr. Fraser.

No, sir.

Let's have a word with these fellows. Mallory crossed the street. He accosted a squat, veiny-nosed sand-hog, who was bawling at the crowd and forcing leaflets upon them. What's the trouble here, brother sapper?

The sand-hog looked Mallory up and down, and grinned around an ivory toothpick. There was a large gold-plated hoop in his ear—or perhaps real gold, as the Brotherhood was a wealthy union, owning many ingenious patents. I'll give ye the long and short of it, mister, since ye ask so civil-like. 'Tis the goddamn' bloody hare-brained pneumatic trains! We told Lord Babbage, in petition, that the bleedin' tunnels never would air proper. But some spunking bastard savant give us some fookin' nonsense lecture, and now the bastard things've gone sour as rotten piss.

That's a serious matter, sir.

Yer fookin' right it is, cove.

Do you know the name of the consulting savant?

The sand-hog talked the question over with a pair of his helmeted friends. Lordship name of Jefferies.

I know Jefferies! Mallory said, surprised. He claimed that Rudwick's pterodactyl couldn't fly. Claimed he'd proven it a 'torpid gliding reptile' that couldn't flap its own wings. The rascal's an incompetent! He should be censured for fraud!

Savant yerself, are ye, mister?

Not one of his sort, Mallory said.

What about yer pal the fookin' copper here? The sandhog tugged agitatedly at the ring in his ear. Wouldn't be taking all this down in yer bleeding notebooks, would ye?

Not at all, Mallory said with dignity. Simply wanted to know the full truth of the matter.

Ye want to know the bloody truth, yer savantship, you'll crawl down there and scrape yerself a bucketful of that moldy shite off the bricks. Sewermen o' twenty years' standing are tossing their guts from the Stink.

The sand-hog moved to confront a woman in banded crinoline. Ye can't go down there, darlin', ain't a single train rolling in London—

Mallory moved on. We haven't heard the last of this! he muttered aloud, vaguely in Fraser's direction. When a savant takes on industrial consultation, he needs to be sure of his facts!

It's the weather, Fraser said.

Not at all! It's a matter of savantry ethics! I got such a call myself—fellow in Yorkshire, wants to build a glass conservatory on the pattern of Brontosaurus spine and ribs. The vault-work is fine and efficient, I told him, but the glass seals will surely leak. So, no job, and no consulting-fee—but my reputation as a scholar is upheld! Mallory snorted on the oily air, cleared his throat, and spat into the gutter. I can't believe that damned fool Jefferies would give Lord Babbage such poor advice.

Never saw any savant talk straight to a sand-hog 

Then you don't know Ned Mallory! I honor any honest man who truly knows his business.

Fraser considered this. He seemed a bit dubious, if one could judge by his leaden expression. Dangerous working-class rioters, your sand-hogs.

A fine Radical union. They stood stoutly by the Party in the early days. And still do.

Killed a deal of police, in the Time of Troubles.

But those were Wellington's police, Mallory said.

Fraser nodded somberly.

There seemed little help for it but to walk all the way to Disraeli's. Fraser, whose long-legged, loping stride matched Mallory's with ease, was nothing loath. Retracing their steps, they entered Hyde Park, Mallory hoping for a breath of fresher air. But here the summer foliage seemed half-wilted in the oily stillness, and the greenish light beneath the boughs was extraordinary in its glum malignity.

The sky had become a bowl of smoke, roiling and thickening. The untoward sight seemed to panic the London starlings, for a great flock of the little birds had risen over the park. Mallory watched in admiration as he walked. Rocking activity was a very elegant lesson in dynamical physics. Quite extraordinary how the systematic interaction of so many little birds could form vast elegant shapes in the air a trapezoid, then a lopped-off pyramid, becoming a flattened crescent, then bowing up in the center like the movement of a tidal surge. There was likely a good paper in the phenomenon.

Mallory stumbled on a tree-root. Fraser caught his arm. Sir.

Yes, Mr. Fraser?

Keep an eye peeled, if you would. We might perhaps be followed.

Mallory glanced about him. It was not much use; the park was crowded and he could see no sign of the Coughing Gent or his derbied henchman.

On Rotten Row, a small detachment of amazon cavalry—pretty horse-breakers they were called in the papers, this being a euphemism for well-to-do courtesans—had gathered about one of their number, thrown from her side-saddle by her chestnut gelding. Mallory and Fraser, as they came closer, saw that the beast had collapsed, and lay frothily panting in the damp grass by the side of the trail. The rider was muddied but unhurt. She was cursing London, and the filthy air, and the women who had urged her to gallop, and the man who had bought her the horse.

Fraser politely ignored the unseemly spectacle. Sir, in my line of work we learn to cultivate the open air. There are no doors ajar or keyholes about us at the moment. Will you inform me of your troubles, in your own plain words, as you yourself have witnessed the events?

Mallory tramped on silently for some moments, juggling the matter in his mind. He was tempted to trust Fraser; of all those men in authority whose aid he might have sought in his troubles this sturdy policeman alone seemed primed to boldly grapple problems at their root. Yet there was much hazard in that trust, and the risk was not to himself alone.

Mr. Fraser, the reputation of a very great lady is involved in this affair. Before I speak, I must have your word as a gentleman that you will not damage the lady's interests.

Fraser walked on with a meditative air, hands clasped behind his back. Ada Byron? he asked at length.

Why, yes! Oliphant told you the truth, did he?

Fraser slowly shook his head. Mr. Oliphant is very discreet. But we of Bow Street are often called upon to put the muzzle on the Byrons' family difficulties. One might almost say that we specialize in the effort.

But you seemed to know almost at once, Mr. Fraser! How could that be?

Sad experience, sir. I know those words of yours, I know that worshipful tone—'the interests of a very great lady.'  Fraser gazed about the gloomy park, taking in the curved benches of teak and iron, crowded with open-collared men, flush-faced women fanning themselves, wilted hordes of city children gone red-eyed and peevish in the stinking heat. Your duchesses, your countesses, they all had their fancy mansions burnt down in the Time of Troubles. Your Rad Ladyships may put on airs, but no one calls them 'great ladies' in quite that old-fashioned way, unless referring to the Queen herself, or our so-called Queen of Engines.

He stepped carefully over the small feathered corpse of a starling, lying quite dead in the graveled path, with its wings spread and its small wrinkled claws in the air. A few yards on, the two slowed to pick their way through a score of them. Perhaps you'd best begin at the beginning, sir. Start with the late Mr. Rudwick, and that business.

Very well. Mallory wiped sweat from his face. His kerchief came away dotted with specks of soot. I am a Doctor of Paleontology. It follows that I'm a good Party man. My family is somewhat humble, but thanks to the Rads I took a doctorate, with honors. I loyally support my Government.

Go on, Fraser said.

I had two years in South America, bone-digging with Lord Loudon, but I was not a leading savant on my own account. When I was offered the chance to lead my own expedition, generously financed, I took it. And so, I later learned, did poor Francis Rudwick, for similar reasons.

You both took the money of the Royal Society's Commission on Free Trade.

Not merely their financing, but their orders, Mr. Fraser. I took fifteen men across the American frontier. We dug bones, of course, and we made a great discovery. But we also smuggled guns to the red-skins, to help them keep the Yankees at bay. We mapped routes down from Canada, taking the lay of the land in detail. If there's war between Britain and America some day Mallory paused. Well, there's an almighty war in America already, is there not? We are with the southern Confederates, in all but name.

You had no idea that Rudwick might be in danger from these secret activities?

Danger? Of course there was danger. But not at home in England I was in Wyoming when Rudwick was killed here; I knew nothing of it, till I read of it in Canada. It was a shock to me I fought bitterly with Rudwick over theory, and I knew he had gone to dig in Mexico, but I didn't know that he and I had the same secret. I didn't know that Rudwick was a Commission dark-lantern man; I only knew that he excelled at our profession. Mallory sighed on the foul air. His own words surprised him; he had never fully admitted these matters even to himself. I rather envied Rudwick, I suppose. He was somewhat my elder, and he was a pupil of Buckland's.

Buckland?

One of the greatest men of our field. He's gone now as well. But truth to tell, I didn't know Rudwick well. He was an unpleasant man, haughty and cold in his relations. He was at his best exploring overseas, at a good distance from decent society. Mallory wiped the back of his neck. When I read of his death in a low brawl, I wasn't entirely surprised at the manner of it.

Do you know if Rudwick ever knew Ada Byron?

No, Mallory said, surprised. I don't know. He and I were not that highly placed in savant circles—not at Lady Ada's level, certainly! Perhaps they were introduced, but I think I should have known it had she favored him.

He was brilliant, you said.

But not galante.

Fraser changed the subject. Oliphant seems to believe that Rudwick was killed by the Texians.

I don't know about any Texians, Mallory said angrily. Who knows anything about Texas? A damned wilderness, seas and continents away! If the Texians killed poor Rudwick, I suppose the Royal Navy should shell their ports in reprisal, or something of the sort. He shook his head. The whole foul business, which had once seemed so daring and clever to him, now seemed something inglorious and vile, little more than a low cheat. We were fools to get involved in that Commission's work, Rudwick and I. A few rich lords, scheming in camera to harass the Yankees. The Yankee republics are already tearing at each other's throats, over slavery or provincial rights or some other damned foolishness! Rudwick died because of that, when he might be alive now, and digging up marvels. It makes me ashamed!

Some might say it was your patriotic duty. That you did it for the interests of England.

I suppose so, Mallory said, shaking himself, but it's a great relief to speak out on the matter, after so long a silence.

Fraser did not seem much impressed by the story. Mallory surmised it was an old and tiresome tale to Inspector Fraser of the Special Branch, or perhaps a mere fragment of larger and more shadowy misdoings. But Fraser did not pursue the matter of politics; he confined himself to the facts of crime. Tell me about the first attack on your own person.

That came at the Derby. I saw a veiled lady within a hired cab, treated dreadfully by a man and woman, whom I took to be criminals—the woman being one Florence Russell Bartlett, as I presume you know?

Yes. We are searching most vigorously for Mrs. Bartlett.

I could not identify her male companion. But I may have overheard his name 'Swing.' Or 'Captain Swing.' 

Fraser seemed a touch surprised. Did you tell that fact to Mr. Oliphant?

No. Mallory, feeling himself on thin ice, said nothing more.

Perhaps that's just as well, Fraser said, after a thoughtful pause. Mr. Oliphant's a bit fanciful at times, and 'Captain Swing' is quite a famous name in conspiracy; a mythical personage, much like 'Ned Ludd,' or 'General Ludd.' The Swing bands were Luddites of the countryside, years ago. Arsonists mostly, rick-burners. But in the Time of Troubles, they grew savage, and killed a deal of the landed gentry, and burned down their fine mansions.

Ah, said Mallory. Do you think this fellow is a Luddite, then?

There are no more Luddites, Fraser said calmly. They're as dead as your dinosaurs. I rather suspect some mischievous antiquary. We have this fellow's description, we have our methods—when we take him, we'll quiz him on his taste in false identities.

Well, this fellow's certainly no rural laborer—he's some sort of Frenchified race-track dandy. When I defended the lady, he went for me with a stiletto! Nicked me in the leg. I suppose I'm lucky that the blade was not venomed.

Perhaps it was, Fraser said. Most poisons are far less potent than the public supposes 

Well, I knocked the rascal down, and drove them off from their victim. The tout swore twice that he would kill me. 'Destroy' me, was the word he used Then I realized that the lady could be only Lady Ada Byron. She began to talk in a very strange manner—as if drugged, or frightened witless She begged me to escort her to the Royal Enclosure, but as we approached the Royal Box, she escaped me by a trick—without so much as a word of thanks for my pains.

Mallory paused, fingering the contents of his pockets. I suppose that's the gist of the matter, sir. Shortly after, I won a good deal of money, wagered on a steam-gurney built by a friend of mine. He gave me very useful information, and it changed me in a moment from a modest scholar to a man of means. Mallory tugged his beard. Great as that change has been, it seemed much the lesser wonder at the time.

I see. Fraser walked on silently. They approached Hyde Park Corner, where men stood on soap-boxes, haranguing the crowd and coughing. Fraser and Mallory fell silent as they walked among the clumped and skeptical listeners.

They crossed the frantic crackling bustle of Knightsbridge, Mallory waiting for Fraser to speak, but the policeman said nothing. At the tall iron gates of Green Park, Fraser turned and watched the street behind them for a long moment. We can cut short through Whitehall, he said at last. I know a back way.

Mallory nodded. He followed Fraser's lead.

At Buckingham Palace, the guard was changing. The Royal Family, as was their habit, were summering in Scotland, but the elite Brigade of Guards carried out the daily ritual in the Queen's absence. The Palace troops proudly marched in the very latest and most efficient British military gear, dun-colored Crimean battle-garb, scientifically spattered to deceive the enemy eye. The clever fabric had utterly confused the Russians, by all accounts. Behind the marchers, a team of artillery horses towed a large military calliope, its merry piping and rousing drones sounding strangely forlorn and eerie in the still, foul air.

Mallory had been waiting for Fraser to reach a conclusion. At last he could wait no longer. Do you believe I met Ada Byron, Mr. Fraser?

Fraser cleared his throat, and spat discreetly. Yes, sir, I do. I don't much like the matter, but I don't see much to marvel at in it.

You don't?

No, sir. I believe I see the root of it, clear enough. It is gambling-trouble. Lady Ada has a Modus.

A Modus—what is that?

It is a legend in sporting circles, Dr. Mallory. A Modus is a gambling-system, a secret trick of mathematical Enginery, to defeat the odds-makers. Every thieving clacker wants a Modus, sir. It is their philosopher's stone, a way to conjure gold from empty air!

Can that be done? Is such an analysis possible?

If it is possible, sir, perhaps Lady Ada Byron could do it.

The friend of Babbage, Mallory said. Yes—I can believe it. Indeed I can!

Well, perhaps she has a Modus, perhaps she only thinks she does, Fraser said. I'm no mathematician, but I know there's never been any betting-system that worked worth a damn. In any case, she's blundered into something nasty again. Fraser grunted in disgust. She's pursued that clackers' phantom for years now, and rubbed shoulders with very ugly company—sharpers, low clackers, loan-makers, and worse. She's amassed gambling-debts, to the point of open scandal!

Absently, Mallory hooked his thumbs within his money-belt. Well! If Ada's truly found a Modus, she won't have debts much longer!

Fraser offered Mallory a look of pity for such naivete. A true Modus would destroy the institutions of the Turf! It would wreck the livelihood of all your sporting-gents Ever seen a track-crowd mill-up about a welsher? That's the sort of stir a Modus would bring. Your Ada may be a great blue-stocking, but she hasn't any more common sense than a housefly!

She is a great savant, Mr. Fraser! A great genius. I have read her papers, and the superb mathematics

 'Lady Ada Byron, Queen of Engines,'  Fraser said, in an utterly leaden tone that had more weariness than contempt. A strong-minded woman! Much like her mother, eh? Wears green spectacles and writes learned books She wants to upset the universe, and play at dice with the hemispheres. Women never know when to stop 

Mallory smiled. Are you a married man, Mr. Fraser?

Not I, Fraser said.

Nor I, not yet. And Lady Ada never married. She was a bride of Science.

Every woman needs a man to hold her reins, Fraser said. It's God's plan for the relations of men and women.

Mallory scowled.

Fraser saw his look, and thought the matter over again. It's Evolution's adaptation for the human species, he amended.

Mallory nodded slowly.


Fraser seemed markedly reluctant to meet Benjamin Disraeli, making some brief excuse about watching the streets for spies, but Mallory thought it far more likely that Fraser knew Disraeli's reputation, and did not trust the journalist's discretion. And small wonder.

Mallory had met many men-of-affairs in London, but Dizzy Disraeli was the Londoner's Londoner. Mallory did not much respect Disraeli, but he did find him amusing company. Disraeli knew, or pretended to know, all the backstage intrigues in the Commons, all the rows of publishers and learned societies, all the soirees and literary Tuesdays at Lady So-and-So's and Lady This-and-That's. He had a sly way of alluding to this knowledge that was almost magical.

Mallory happened to know that Disraeli had in fact been blackballed at three or four gentlemen's clubs, perhaps because, although a professed and respectable agnostic, Disraeli was of Jewish descent. But the man's modes and manners somehow left the invincible impression that any Londoner who did not know Dizzy was an imbecile, or moribund. It was like a mystic aura, a miasma that surrounded the fellow, and there were times when Mallory himself could not help but believe it.

A female servant in mobcap and apron showed Mallory in. Disraeli was awake and eating his breakfast, strong black coffee and a stinking platter of mackerel fried in gin. He wore slippers, a Turkish robe, and a tasseled velvet fez. Morning, Mallory. Dreadful morning. Beastly.

It is, rather.

Disraeli crammed the last of his mackerel into his mouth and began to stuff the first pipe of the day. Actually, you're just the fellow I need to see today, Mallory. Bit of a clacker, technical expert?

Oh?

New damned thing, I bought it just last Wednesday. The shopman swore it would make life easier. Disraeli led the way into his office, a room reminiscent of Mr. Wakefield's office in the Central Statistics Bureau, though far less ambitious in scale, and littered with pipe-dottles, lurid magazines, and half-eaten sandwiches. The floor was crowded with carved blocks of cork and heaps of shredded excelsior.

Mallory saw that Disraeli had bought himself a Colt & Maxwell Typing Engine, and had managed to haul the thing out of its packing-crate and set it upright on its curved iron legs. It squatted on the stained oak boards before a patent office-chair.

Looks all right, Mallory said. What is the problem?

Well, I can pump the treadle, and I can manage the handles well enough, Disraeli said. I can get the little needle to move to the letters I want. But nothing comes out.

Mallory opened the side of the casing, deftly threaded the perforated tape through its gearing-spools, then checked the loading-chute for the fan-fold paper. Disraeli had failed to engage the sprockets properly. Mallory sat in the office-chair, foot-pumped the typer up to speed, and grasped the crank-handles. What shall I write? Dictate something.

 'Knowledge is power,'  Disraeli said readily.

Mallory cranked the needle back and forth through its glass-dialed alphabet. Perforated tape inched out, winding neatly onto its spring-loaded spool, and the rotating printing-wheel made a reassuring popping racket. Mallory let the flywheel die down and ratcheted the first sheet of paper out of its slot. KNOWLEDGEE IS PPOWER, it said.

Takes a dab hand, Mallory said, handing the page to the journalist. But you'll get used to it.

I can scribble faster than this! Disraeli complained. And in a better hand, by far!

Yes, Mallory said patiently, but you can't reload the tape; bit of scissors and glue, you can loop your punch-tape through and the machine spits out page after page, so long as you push the treadle. As many copies as you like.

Charming, Disraeli said.

And of course you can revise what you've written. Simple matter of clipping and pasting the tape.

Professionals never revise, Disraeli said sourly. And suppose I want to write something elegant and long-winded. Something such as Disraeli waved his smoldering pipe.  'There are tumults of the mind, when, like the great convulsions of Nature, all seems anarchy and returning chaos; yet often, in those moments of vast disturbance, as in the strife of Nature itself, some new principle of order, or some new impulse of conduct, develops itself, and controls, and regulates, and brings to an harmonious consequence, passions and elements which seem only to threaten despair and subversion.' 

That's rather good, Mallory said.

Like it? From your new chapter. But how am I to concentrate on eloquence while I'm pushing and cranking like a washer-woman?

Well, if you make some mistake, you can always reprint a new page fresh from the tape.

They claimed this device would save me paper!

You might hire a skilled secretary, and dictate.

They said it would save me money, as well! Disraeli puffed at the amber tip of his long-stemmed meerschaum. I suppose it can't be helped. The publishers will force the innovation on us. Already the Evening Telegraph is setting up entirely with Engines. Quite a to-do about it in Government. The typesetting brotherhoods, you know. But enough shoptalk, Mallory. To work, eh? I'm afraid we must hasten. I should like to take notes for at least two chapters today.

Why?

I'm leaving London for the Continent, with a group of friends, Disraeli said. Switzerland, we think. Some little cantonment high in the Alps where a few jolly scribes can draw a breath of fresh air.

It is rather bad outside, Mallory said. Very ominous weather.

It's the talk of every salon, Disraeli told him, seating himself at his desk. He began to hunt through cubbyholes for his sheaf of notes. London always stinks in summer, but they're calling this 'The Great Stink.' All the gentry have their travels planned, or are gone already! There shall scarcely be a fashionable soul left in London. They say Parliament itself will flee upstream to Hampton Court, and the Law Courts to Oxford!

What, truly?

Oh yes. Dire measures are in the works. All planned sub rosa of course, to prevent mob panic. Disraeli turned in his chair and winked. But measures are coming, you may depend upon that.

What sort of measures, Dizzy?

Rationing water, shutting off smokestacks and gaslights, that sort of thing, Disraeli said airily. One may say what one likes about the institution of merit-lordship. But at least it has guaranteed that the leadership of our country is not stupid.

Disraeli spread his notes across the desk. The Government have highly scientific contingency plans, you know. Your invasions, your fires, your droughts and plagues He leafed through the notes, licking his thumb. Some people dote on contemplating disasters.

Mallory found this gossip difficult to believe. What exactly is contained in these 'contingency plans'?

All sorts of things. Evacuation plans, I suppose.

Surely you're not implying that Government intend to evacuate London.

Disraeli smiled wickedly. If you smelled the Thames outside Parliament, you wouldn't wonder that our solons want to bolt.

That bad, eh?

The Thames is a putrid, disease-ridden tidal sewer! Disraeli proclaimed. Thickened with ingredients from breweries, gas-works, and chemical and mineral factories! Putrid matter hangs like vile seaweed from the pilings of Westminster Bridge, and every passing steamer chums up a feculent eddy that nearly overwhelms her crew with foetor!

Mallory smiled. Wrote an editorial about it, did we?

For the Morning Clarion Disraeli shrugged. I admit my rhetoric is somewhat over-colored. But it has been a damned odd summer, and that's the truth. A few days of good soaking rain, to flush out the Thames and break these odd stifling clouds, and all will be well with us. But much more of this freak weather, and those who are elderly, or weak of lung, may suffer greatly.

You think so, truly?

Disraeli lowered his voice. They say the cholera is loose again in Limehouse.

Mallory felt a dreadful chill. Who says it?

Dame Rumour. But who will doubt her in these circumstances? In such a vile summer, it's all too likely that effluvia and foetor will spread a deadly contagion. Disraeli emptied his pipe and began re-loading it from a rubber-sealed humidor stuffed with black Turkish shag. I dearly love this city, Mallory, but there are times when discretion must outweigh devotion. You have family in Sussex, I know. If I were you, I should leave at once, and join them.

But I have a speech to deliver. In two days. On the Brontosaurus. With kinotrope accompaniment!

Cancel the speech, Disraeli said, fussing with a repeating-match. Postpone it.

I cannot. It is to be a great occasion, a great professional and popular event!

Mallory, there shan't be anyone to see it. No one who matters, anyway. You'll be wasting your breath.

There shall be working-men, Mallory said stubbornly. The humbler classes can't afford to leave London.

Oh, Disraeli nodded, puffing smoke. That will be splendid. The sort of fellows who read tuppenny dreadfuls. Be sure to commend me to your audience.

Mallory set his jaw stubbornly.

Disraeli sighed. Let's to work. We've a lot to do. He plucked the latest issue of Family Museum from a shelf. What did you think of last week's episode?

Fine. The best yet.

Too much damned scientific theory in it, Disraeli said. It needs more sentimental interest.

What's wrong with theory, if it is good theory?

No one but a specialist wants to read about the hinging pressures of a reptile's jawbone, Mallory. Truth to tell, there's only one thing people really want to know about dinosaurs why the damned things are all dead.

I thought we agreed to save that for the end.

Oh, yes. Makes a fine climax, that business with the great smashing comet, and the great black dust-storm wiping out all reptilian life and so forth. Very dramatic, very catastrophic. That's what the public likes about Catastrophism, Mallory. Catastrophe feels better than this Uniformity drivel about the Earth being a thousand million years old. Tedious and boring—boring on the face of it!

An appeal to vulgar emotion is neither here nor there! Mallory said hotly. The evidence supports me! Look at the Moon—absolutely covered with comet-craters!

Yes, Disraeli said absently, rigorous science, so much the better.

No one can explain how the Sun could burn for even ten million years. No combustion could last that long—it violates elementary laws of physics! 

Give it a rest for a moment. I'm all with your friend Huxley that we should enlighten the public ignorance, but one must throw the dog a bone every once in a while. Our readers want to know about Leviathan Mallory, the man.

Mallory grunted.

That's why we must get back to the business of this Indian girl.

Mallory shook his head. He had been dreading this. She wasn't a 'girl.' She was a native woman 

We've already explained that you've never married, Disraeli said patiently. You won't acknowledge any English sweetheart. The time has come to bring out this Indian maiden. You don't have to be indecent or blunt about matters. Just a few kind words about her, a gallantry or two, a few dropped hints. Women dote on that business, Mallory. And they read far more than men do. Disraeli picked up his reservoir-pen. You haven't even told me her name.

Mallory sat in a chair. The Cheyenne don't have names as we do. Especially not their women.

She must have been called something.

Well, sometimes she was called Widow-of-Red-Blanket, and sometimes she was called Mother-of-Spotted-Snake, or Mother-of-Lame-Horse. But I couldn't swear to any of those names, actually. We had this drunken half-breed Frenchie with us as interpreter, and he lied like a cur.

Disraeli was disappointed. You never spoke directly to her, then?

I don't know. I got to where I could manage pretty well with the hand-signs. Her name was Wak-see-nee-ha-wah, or Wak-nee-see-wah-ha, something much like that.

How would it be if I call her 'Prairie Maiden'?

Dizzy, she was a widow. She had two grown children. She was missing some teeth and was lean as a wolf.

Disraeli sighed. You're not cooperating. Mallory.

All right. Mallory tugged his beard. She was a good seamstress; you could say that. We won her, ah, friendship, by giving her needles. Steel needles, rather than bison-bone splinters. And glass beads, of course. They all want glass beads.

 'Shy at first. Prairie Flower was won over by her innate love for feminine accomplishments,'  Disraeli said, scribbling.

Disraeli teased at the edges of the matter, bit by bit, as Mallory squirmed in his chair.

It was nothing like the truth. The truth could not be written on civilized paper. Mallory had put the whole squalid business successfully out of his mind. But he had not forgotten it, not really. As Disraeli sat scribbling his sentimental treacle, the truth surged back at Mallory with savage vividness.

It was snowing outside the conical tents and the Cheyenne were drunk. Whooping howling drunken pandemonium, because the wretches had no real idea what liquor was; for them it was a poison and an incubus. They pranced and staggered like bedlamites, firing their rifles into the empty American heavens, and they fell on the frozen ground in the grip of visions, showing nothing but the whites of eyes. Once they had started, they would go on for hours.

Mallory had not wanted to go in to the widow. He had fought the temptation for many days, but the time had finally come when he realized it would do his soul less damage to simply get the business over with. So he had drunk two inches from one of the whiskey bottles, two inches of cheap Birmingham rotgut, shipped over with the rifles. He had gone inside the tent where the widow sat crouched in her blankets and leathers over the dung-fire. The two children left, their round brown faces squinting bleakly against the wind.

Mallory showed her a new needle, and did the business with his hands, lewd gestures. The widow nodded, with the exaggerated wobble of someone to whom a nod was a foreign language, and slid back into her nest of hides, and lay on her back with her legs spread, and stretched her arms up. Mallory climbed up over her, got under the blankets with her, pulled his taut and aching member out of his trousers, and forced it between her legs. He had thought it would be over with quickly, and perhaps without much shame, but it was too strange and upsetting to him. The rutting went on for a long time, and finally she began to look at him with a kind of querulous shyness, and plucked curiously at the hair of his beard. And at last the warmth, the sweet friction, the rank animal smell of her, thawed something in him, and he spent long and hard, spent inside her, though he had not meant to do that. The three other times he went to her, later, he withdrew, and did not risk getting the poor creature with child. He was very sorry he had done it even once. But if she was with child when they left, the odds were great that it was not his at all, but one of the other men's.

At length Disraeli moved on to other matters and things became more easy. But Mallory left Disraeli's rooms full of bitter confusion. It was not Disraeli's flowery prose that had stirred up the devil in him, but the savage power of his own memories. The vital animus had returned with a vengeance. He was stiff and restless with lust, and felt out of his own command. He had not had a woman since Canada, and the French girl in Toronto had not seemed wholly clean. He needed a woman, badly. An Englishwoman, some country girl with solid white legs and fat fair freckled arms

Mallory made his way back to Fleet Street. Out in the open air, his eyes began to smart almost at once. There was no sign of Fraser in the hustling crowds. The gloom of the day was truly extraordinary. It was scarcely noon, but the dome of St. Paul's was shrouded in filthy mist. Great rolling wads of oily fog hid the spires and the giant bannered adverts of Ludgate Hill. Fleet Street was a high-piled clattering chaos, all whip-cracking, steam-snorting, shouting. The women on the pavements crouched under soot-stained parasols and walked half-bent, and men and women alike clutched kerchiefs to their eyes and noses. Men and boys lugged family carpetbags and rubber-handled traveling-cases, their cheery straw boaters already speckled with detritus. A crowded excursion-train chugged past on the spidery elevated track of the London, Chatham & Dover, its cloud of cindered exhaust hanging in the sullen air like a banner of filth.

Mallory studied the sky. The thready jellyfish mess of rising smoke was gone now, swallowed in a looming opaque fog. Here and there, gray flakes of something like snow were settling delicately over Fleet Street. Mallory examined one that lit on his jacket-sleeve, a strange slaggy flake of crystallized grit. At his touch it burst into the finest ash.

Fraser was shouting at him from beneath a lamp-post across the street. Dr. Mallory! Fraser beckoned in a manner that was, for him, remarkably animated; Mallory realized belatedly that Fraser had likely been shouting at him for some time.

Mallory fought and dodged his way across the traffic cabs, carts, a large stumbling herd of bleating, wheezing sheep. The effort of it set him gasping.

Two strangers stood beneath the lamp-post with Fraser, both their faces tightly swathed with white kerchiefs. The taller fellow had been breathing through his kerchief for some time, for the cloth beneath his nose was stained yellow-brown. Take 'em off, lads, Fraser commanded. Sullenly, the two strangers tugged their kerchiefs below their chins.

The Coughing Gent! Mallory said, stunned.

Permit me, Fraser said wryly. This is Mr. J. C. Tate, and this is his partner, Mr. George Velasco. They style themselves confidential agents, or something of the sort. Fraser's mouth grew thinner, became something almost like a smile. I believe you gents have already met Dr. Edward Mallory.

We know 'im, Tate said. There was a swollen purple bruise on the side of Tate's jaw. The kerchief had hidden it. Bloody lunatic, he is! Violent bloody maniac, as ought to be in Bedlam.

Mr. Tate was an officer on our metropolitan force, Fraser said, fixing Tate with a leaden stare. Till he lost the post.

I resigned! Tate declared. I quit on principle, as there's no way to get justice done in the public police in London, and you know that as well as I do, Ebenezer Fraser.

As for Mr. Velasco, he's one of your would-be dark-lantern men, Fraser said mildly. Father came to London as a Spanish royalist refugee, but our young Mr. George is apt to turn his hand to anything—false passports, keyhole-peering, blackjacking prominent savants in the street 

I am a native-born British citizen, said the swarthy little half-breed, with an ugly glare at Mallory.

Don't put on airs, Fraser, Tate said. You walked a beat same as me, and if you're a big brass-hat now, it's only so you can sit on dirty scandals for the Government. Clap the darbies on us, Fraser! Take us into custody! Do your worst! I've my own friends, you know.

I won't let Dr. Mallory hit you, Tate. Stop worrying. But do tell us why you've been dogging him.

Professional confidentiality, Tate protested. Can't nark on a patron.

Don't be a fool, Fraser said.

Your gentleman here is a bloody murderer! Had his rival gutted like a fish!

I did no such thing, Mallory said. I'm a Royal Society scholar, not some back-alley conspirator!

Tate and Velasco exchanged glances of amazed skepticism. Velasco began to snicker helplessly.

What's so amusing? Mallory said.

They were hired by one of your colleagues, Fraser said. This is a Royal Society intrigue. Is that not so, Mr. Tate?

I told you I ain't tellin', Tate said.

Is it the Commission on Free Trade? Mallory demanded. No answer. Is it Charles Lyell?

Tate rolled his smoke-reddened eyes and elbowed Velasco in the ribs. He's as pure as the snow, your Dr. Mallory is, just as you say, Fraser. He wiped his face with his stained kerchief. Things've come to a pretty pass, damn it all, with London stinking to perdition and the country in the hands of learned lunatics with too much money and hearts of stone!

Mallory felt the strong impulse to give the insolent rascal another sharp taste of the fist, but with a swift effort of will he throttled the useless instinct. He stroked his beard with a professorial air, and smiled on Tate, coldly and deliberately.

Whoever your employer may be, Mallory said, he shan't be very happy that Mr. Fraser and I have found you out.

Tate watched Mallory narrowly, saying nothing. Velasco put his hands in his pockets and looked ready to sidle off at any moment.

We may have come to blows earlier, Mallory said, but I pride myself that I can rise above a natural resentment, and see our situation objectively! Now that you've lost the cover of deceit under which you have been stalking me, you're of no use to your patron anymore. Is that not so?

What if it is? Tate asked.

The two of you might still be of considerable use to a certain Ned Mallory. What is he paying you, this fancy patron fellow?

Have a care, Mallory, Fraser warned.

If you've watched me at all closely, you must be aware that I'm a generous man, Mallory insisted.

Five shillings a day, Tate muttered.

Each, Velasco put in. Plus expenses.

They're lying, Fraser said.

I'll have five golden guineas waiting for you, in my rooms at the Palace of Paleontology, at the end of this week, Mallory promised. In exchange for that sum, I want you to treat your former patron exactly as you've treated me—simple poetic justice, as it were! Stalk him secretly, wherever he goes, and tell me everything he does. That's what you were hired for, is it not?

More or less, Tate admitted. We might think about that, squire, if you gave us that tin on deposit.

I might give you some part of the money, Mallory allowed. But then you must give me information on deposit.

Velasco and Tate looked hard at one another. Give us a moment to confer about it. The two private detectives wandered away through the jostle of sidewalk traffic and sought shelter in the leeway of an iron-fenced obelisk.

Those two aren't worth five guineas in a year, Fraser said.

I suppose they are vicious rascals, Mallory agreed, but it scarcely matters what they are, Fraser. I'm after what they know.

Tate returned at length, the kerchief back over his face. Cove name of Peter Foulke, he said, his voice muffled. I wouldn't have said that—wild horses couldn't drag it out of me—only the bugger puts on airs and orders us about like a bloody Lordship. Don't trust our integrity. Don't trust us to act in his interests. Don't seem to think we know how to do our own job.

To hell with him, Velasco said. Stuck between kerchief and derby-brim, the spit-curls on his cheeks stuck out like greased wings. Velasco and Tate don't cross the Specials for any Peter bloody Foulke.

Mallory offered Tate a crisp pound-note from his book. Tate looked it over, folded it between his fingers with a card-sharper's dexterity, and made it vanish. Another of those for my friend here, to seal the deal?

I suspected it was Foulke all along, Mallory said.

Then here's something you don't know, squire, Tate said. We ain't the only ones dogging you. While you hoof along like an elephant, talking to yourself, there's this flash cove and his missus on your heels, three days in the last five.

Fraser spoke up sharply. But not today, eh?

Tate chuckled behind his kerchief. Reckon they saw you and hooked it, Fraser. That vinegar phiz of yours would make 'em hedge off, sure. Jumpy as cats, those two.

Do they know you saw them? Fraser said.

They ain't stupid, Fraser. They're up and flash. He's a racing-cove or I miss my guess, and she's a high-flyer. The dolly tried talking velvet to Velasco here, wanted to know who hired us. Tate paused. We didn't say.

What did they say about themselves? Fraser said sharply.

She said she was Francis Rudwick's sister, Velasco said. Investigating her brother's murder. Said that straight out, without my asking.

Of course we didn't believe that cakey talk, Tate said. She don't look a bit like Rudwick. Nice-looking bit o' muslin, though. Sweet face, red hair, more likely she was Rudwick's convenient.

She's a murderess! Mallory said.

Funny thing, squire, that's just what she says about you.

Do you know where to find them? Fraser asked.

Tate shook his head.

We could look, Velasco offered.

Why don't you do that while you follow Foulke, Mallory said, in a burst of inspiration. I have a notion they might all be in league somehow.

Foulke's away in Brighton, Tate said. Couldn't abide the Stink—delicate sensibilities. And if we're to go to Brighton, Velasco and I could do with the railway fare—expenses, you know.

Bill me, Mallory said. He gave Velasco a pound-note.

Dr. Mallory wants that bill fully itemized, Fraser said. With receipts.

Right and fly, squire, Tate said. He touched the brim of his hat with a copper's salute. Delighted to serve the interests of the nation.

And keep a civil tongue in your head, Tate.

Tate ignored him, and leered at Mallory. You'll be hearing from us, squire.

Fraser and Mallory watched them go. I reckon you're out two pounds, Fraser said. You'll never see those two again.

Cheap at the price, perhaps, Mallory said.

No it ain't, sir. There's far cheaper ways.

At least I shan't be coshed from behind any longer.

No, sir, not by them.


Mallory and Fraser ate gritty sandwiches of turkey and bacon from a glass-sided hot-cart. They were once again unable to hire a cabriolet. None were visible in the street. The underground stations were all closed, with angry sand-hog pickets shouting foul abuse at passers-by.

The day's second appointment, in Jermyn Street, was a severe disappointment to Mallory. He had come to the Museum to confer about his speech, but Mr. Keats, the Royal Society kinotropist, had sent a telegram declaring himself very ill, and Huxley had been dragooned into some committee of savant Lordships meeting to consider the emergency. Mallory could not even manage to cancel his speech, as Disraeli had suggested, for Mr. Trenham Reeks declared himself unable to make such a decision without Huxley's authority, and Huxley himself had left no forwarding address or telegram-number.

To add salt to the wound, the Museum of Practical Geology was almost deserted, the cheery crowds of schoolchildren and natural-history enthusiasts depleted to a few poor sullen wretches clearly come in for the sake of cleaner air and some escape from the heat. They slouched and loitered under the towering skeleton of the Leviathan as if they longed to crack its mighty bones and suck the marrow.

There was nothing for it but to tramp back to the Palace of Paleontology and prepare for the night's dinner with the Young Men's Agnostic Association. The Y.M.A.A. were a savantry student-group. Mallory, as lion of the evening, would be expected to make a few after-dinner remarks. He'd been quite looking forward to the event, as the Y.M.A.A. were a jolly lot, not at all as pompous as their respectable name might suggest, and the all-male company would allow him to make a few unbuttoned jests suitable for young bachelors. Mallory had heard several such, from Dizzy Disraeli, that he thought very good indeed. But now he wondered how many of his erstwhile hosts were left in London, or how the young men might manage to gather together, if they were still so inclined, and worst yet, what the dining might be like in the upstairs room of the Black Friar pub, which was near Blackfriars Bridge and just upwind of the Thames.

The streets were visibly emptying. Shop after shop bore CLOSED signs. Mallory had hoped to find a barber to trim his hair and beard, but he'd had no such luck. London's citizenry had fled, or gone to earth behind tight-closed windows. Smoke had settled to ground-level and mixed with a foetid fog, a yellow pea-soup of it everywhere, and it was difficult to see the length of a half-block. The rare pedestrians emerged from obscurity like well-dressed ghosts. Fraser led the way, uncomplaining and unerring, and Mallory supposed that the veteran copper could have led them through the London streets blindfolded, with near as much ease. They wore their kerchiefs over their faces now. It seemed a sensible precaution, though it rather bothered Mallory that Fraser now seemed gagged as well as reticent.

The kinotropes are the sticking-point, Mallory opined, as they tramped up the Brompton Road, the spires of its scientific palaces obscured by foetor. It wasn't like this before I left England. Two years ago the damned things were nowhere near so common. Now I'm not allowed to give a public speech without one. He coughed. It gave me a turn to see that long panel back in Fleet Street, mounted in front of the Evening Telegraph, clacking away like sixty, over the heads of the crowd! 'Trains Closed As Sand-Hogs Strike,' the thing said, 'Parliament Decries State of Thames.' 

What's wrong with that? Fraser asked.

It doesn't say anything, Mallory said. Who in Parliament? What state of the Thames, specifically? What did Parliament say about it? Wise things or foolish things?

Fraser grunted.

There is a wicked pretense that one has been informed. But no such thing has truly occurred! A mere slogan, an empty litany. No arguments are heard, no evidence is weighed. It isn't news at all, only a source of amusement for idlers.

Some might say it's better for idlers to know a bit than nothing at all.

Some might be damned fools, then, Fraser. This kino-sloganry is like printing bank-notes with no gold to back them, or writing checks on an empty account. If that is to be the level of rational discourse for the common folk, then I must say three cheers for the authority of the House of Lords.

A fire-gurney chugged slowly past them, with weary firemen on its running-boards, their clothing and faces blackened at their work, or perhaps by the London air itself, or perhaps by the streaming stinking soot of the gurney's own smokestacks. To Mallory, it seemed a strangely ironic thing that a fire-gurney should propel itself through the agency of a heap of blazing coal. But perhaps there was sense in it after all, for in weather like this a team of horses would be hard put to gallop a block.


Mallory was anxious to soothe his raw throat with a huckle-buff, but it seemed smokier inside the Palace of Paleontology than out. There was a harsh stench, like burnt linen.

Perhaps Kelly's imperial gallons of manganate of soda had eaten through the pipes. In any case, this Stink seemed to have finally defeated the Palace guests, for there was scarcely a soul in the lobby, and not a murmur from the dining-room.

Mallory was looking for service in the saloon, amid the lacquered screens and red silk upholstery, when Kelly himself appeared, his face taut and resolute. Dr. Mallory?

Yes, Kelly?

I've bad news for you, sir. An unhappy event here. A fire, sir.

Mallory glanced at Fraser.

Yes, sir, the concierge said. Sir, when you left today, did you perhaps leave clothing near the gas-jet? Or a cigar still smoldering?

You don't mean to say the fire was in my room!

I fear so, sir.

A serious fire?

The guests thought it so, sir. So did the firemen. Kelly said nothing of the feelings of the Palace staff, but his face made his sentiments clear.

I always turn out the gas! Mallory blurted. I don't recall exactly—but I always turn out the gas.

Your door was locked, sir. Firemen had to break it in.

We'll want a look, Fraser suggested mildly.

The door of Mallory's room had been axed in, and the warped floor was awash with sand and water. Mallory's heaps of magazines and paper correspondence had blazed up very fiercely, thoroughly consuming his desk and a great blackened swatch of the carpet. There was a huge charred hole in the wall behind the desk and the ceiling above it, with naked joists and rafters gone to charcoal, and Mallory's wardrobe, replete with all his London finery, burnt to cindered rags and smashed mirror-glass. Mallory was beside himself with anger and a deep foreboding shame.

You locked your door, sir? Fraser asked.

I always do. Always!

May I see your key?

Mallory handed Fraser his key-chain. Fraser knelt quietly beside the splintered door-frame. He examined the keyhole closely, then rose to his feet.

Were there any suspicious characters reported in the hall? Fraser asked Kelly.

Kelly was offended. May I ask who you are to inquire, sir?

Inspector Fraser, Bow Street.

No, Inspector, Kelly said, sucking his teeth. No suspicious characters. Not to my personal knowledge!

You'll keep this matter confidential, Mr. Kelly. I assume that like other Royal Society establishments you take only guests who are accredited savants?

That is our firm policy. Inspector!

But your guests are allowed visitors?

Male visitors, sir. Properly escorted ladies—nothing scandalous, sir!

A well-dressed hotel cracksman, Fraser concluded. And arsonist. Not so good an arsonist as he is a cracksman, for he was rather clumsy in the way he heaped those papers below the desk and the wardrobe. He'd a skeleton bar-key for this tumbler-lock. Had to scrape about a bit, but I doubt it took him five full minutes.

This beggars belief, Mallory said.

Kelly looked near tears. A savant guest burned out of his room! I don't know what to say! I have not heard of such a wickedness since the days of Ludd! 'Tis a shame. Dr. Mallory—a foul shame!

Mallory shook his head. I should have warned you of this, Mr. Kelly. I have dire enemies.

Kelly swallowed. We know, sir. There's much talk of it among the staff, sir.

Fraser was examining the remnants of the desk, poking about in the litter with the warped brass hanger-rod from the wardrobe. Tallow, he said.

We carry insurance. Dr. Mallory, Kelly said hopefully. I don't know if our policy covers exactly this sort of matter, but I do hope we can make good your losses! Please accept my most sincere apologies!

It scotches me, Mallory said, looking about the wreckage. But not so great a hurt as perhaps they hoped! I keep all my most important papers in the Palace safety-box. And of course I never leave money here. He paused. I assume the Palace safe remains unrifled, Mr. Kelly.

Yes, sir, Kelly said. Or rather—let me see to that at once, sir. He left hastily, bowing.

Your friend the Derby stiletto-man, Fraser said. He did not dare dog you today, but once we'd left, he crept up here, cracked the door, and lit candles among your heaped-up papers. He was long and safely gone before the alarm was raised.

He must know a deal about my schedule, Mallory said. Knows all about me, I daresay. He's plundered my number. He's taken me for a cake.

In a manner of speaking, sir. Fraser tossed the brass pole aside. He's a trumped-up amateur. Your skilled arsonist uses liquid paraffin, which consumes itself and all it touches.

I shan't make that dinner with the Agnostics tonight, Fraser. I've nothing to wear!

Fraser stood quite still. I can see you face misfortune very bravely—like a scholar and a gentleman. Dr. Mallory.

Thank you, Mallory said. There was a silence. Fraser, I need a drink.

Fraser nodded slowly.

For Heaven's sake, Fraser, let us go somewhere where we can do some genuine, blackguard, poverty-stricken drinking, with no false gingerbread glitter thrown over everything! Let us away from the fashionable Palace, to a house where they don't mind letting in a man with nothing left but the coat on his back! Mallory kicked about in the rubble of his wardrobe.

I know what you need, sir, Fraser said soothingly. A cheery place to let off a bit of steam—where there's drink and dance and lively ladies.

Mallory discovered the blackened brass toggles of his Wyoming military-coat. The sight of this stung him deeply. You wouldn't be trying to nanny me, would you, Fraser? I suppose Oliphant told you to nanny me. I think that would be a mistake. I'm in a mood for trouble, Fraser.

I don't mistake you at all, sir. The day has been very unkind. But then, you've yet to see Cremorne Gardens.

The only thing I want to see is the stiletto-man in the sights of a buffalo-rifle!

I understand that sentiment perfectly, sir.

Mallory opened his silver cigar-case—at least he still had that possession—and lit his last prime Havana. He puffed it hard, until the calm of good tobacco hit his blood. On the other hand, he said at last, I suppose your Cremorne Gardens might well do in a pinch.


Fraser led the way, far down Cromwell Lane, past the great pile of pale brick that was the Diseased Chest Hospital a nightmarishly dire place this evening. Mallory could not help but think.

A vague notion of medical grimness continued to prey on Mallory's mind, so much so that they stopped at the next public-house, where Mallory had four or possibly five shots of a surprisingly decent whiskey. The pub was crowded with New Brompton locals, who seemed quite cheery in a cozy, besieged sort of way, though they kept slipping tuppenny bits into a pianola that tinkled Come to the Bower, a song Mallory loathed. There was no rest for him here. In any case, it was not Cremorne Gardens.

They came across the first sign of real trouble a few blocks down New Brompton Road, by Bennett & Harper's Patent Floor-Covering Manufactory. An unruly crowd of uniformed men milled at the gates of the sprawling factory. Industrial trouble of some sort.

It took Fraser and Mallory some time to discover that the crowd actually consisted almost entirely of policemen. Bennett & Harper's produced a gaily patterned water-proof stuff made of burlap, ground cork, and coal derivatives, suitable for trimming and gluing-down in the kitchens and baths of the middle-class. They also produced great volumes of effluent from half-a-dozen stacks, which clearly the city would temporarily be better off without. The first officials on the scene—or at least they claimed that distinction—had been a group of inspectors from the Royal Patent Office, pressed into emergency industrial duty by a Government contingency plan. But Messrs. Bennett and Harper, anxious not to lose the day's production, had challenged the patent-men's legal authority to shut down their works. They were soon confronted by two more inspectors from a Royal Society industrial committee, who claimed precedent. The local constable had been attracted by the uproar, followed by a flying-squad of Bow Street metropolitans arriving in a commandeered steam-bus. Most 'buses had now been seized by Government, along with the city's cab-fleet, in accordance with contingency measures intended to deal with rail strikes.

The police had immediately shut down the stacks, fine work and a credit to the Government's good intentions, but the manufactory's workers were still on the premises, idle and very restive, for no one had mentioned a holiday with pay, though the workers clearly felt they deserved one under the circumstances. It also remained to be seen who was responsible for guarding the property of Messrs. Bennett and Harper, and who would be responsible for giving the official word to start the boilers again.

Worst of all, there seemed to be dire problems with the police telegraph-service—routed, presumably, through the Westminster pyramid of the Central Statistics Bureau. There must be trouble there from the Stink, Mallory surmised. You're Special Branch, Mr. Fraser, Mallory said. Why don't you straighten these dullards out?

Very witty, Fraser said.

I wondered why we hadn't seen officers patrolling the streets. They must be snarled up in the premises of factories all over London!

You seem awfully pleased about the matter, Fraser said.

Bureaucrats! Mallory scoffed cheerily. They might have known this would happen, if they'd properly studied Catastrophist theory. It is a concatenation of synergistic interactions; the whole system is on the period-doubling route to Chaos!

What does that mean, pray?

Essentially, Mallory said, smiling behind his kerchief, in layman's terms, it means that everything gets twice as bad, twice as fast, until everything falls completely apart!

That's savantry talk. You don't presume that has anything to do with real matters here in London, do you?

Very interesting question! Mallory nodded. Deep metaphysical roots! If I model a phenomenon accurately, does that mean I understand it? Or might it be simple coincidence, or an artifact of the technique? Of course, as an ardent simulationist, I myself put much faith in Engine-modeling. But the doctrine can be questioned, no doubt of it. Deep waters, Fraser! The sort of thing that old Hume and Bishop Berkeley used to thrive on!

You're not drunk, are you, sir?

Just a bit elevated, Mallory said. Squiffy, you might say. They tramped on, wisely leaving the police to their squabbling.

Mallory suddenly felt the loss of his good old Wyoming toggle-coat. He missed his canteen, his spyglass, the snug stiffness of a rifle over his back. The look of a cold, clean, wild horizon where life was fully lived and death was swift and honest. He wished he were out of London, on expedition again. He could cancel all his engagements. He could apply for funding to the Royal Society, or better yet, the Geographical. He would leave England!

You needn't do that, sir, Fraser said. Might make matters worse, actually.

Was I talking aloud?

A bit, sir. Yes.

Where could a man get a first-class game-rifle here in town, Fraser?

They were behind Chelsea Park now, in a place called Camera Square, where the shops offered fancy optical goods talbotypes, magic-lanterns, phenakistoscopes, telescopes for the amateur star-gazer. There were toy microscopes for the boy-savant of the house, boys often taking a strong interest in the wriggling animalcules in pond-water. The minute creatures were of no practical interest, but their study might lead young minds to the doctrines of genuine Science. Stung by sentiment, Mallory paused before a window displaying such microscopes. They reminded him of kindly old Lord Mantell, who had given him his first job tidying-up about the Lewes Museum. From there he'd moved to cataloguing bones and birds'-eggs, and at last to a real Cambridge scholarship. The old Lord had been a bit eager with the birch-switch, he now recalled, but likely no more than Mallory had deserved.

There came an odd whizzing sound from up the pavement. Mallory glanced in that direction and saw a queer half-crouching ghostly figure emerge from the fog, clothing flapping about it with speed, a pair of walking-canes doubled up under its arms.

Mallory jumped back at the last possible instant as the boy shot past him with a yowling whoop. A London boy, thirteen or so, on rubber-wheeled boots. The boy turned swiftly, skidded to an expert stop, and began to pole himself back up the pavement with the walking-sticks. Presently, an entire pack of boys had surrounded Mallory and Fraser, leaping and yelping in devilish glee. None of the others had wheeled shoes, but nearly all wore the little square cloth masks that Bureau clerks donned to tend their Engines.

Say, you lads! Fraser barked, where did you get those masks?

They ignored him. That was dead flash! one of them shouted. Do it again. Bill! Another boy cocked his leg three times with an odd ritual motion, then jumped high in the air and crowed Sugar! Those around him laughed and cheered.

Calm down, you, Fraser ordered.

Vinegar phiz! a wicked boy fleered at him. Shocking bad hat! The whole pack of them burst into raucous hilarity.

Where are your parents? Fraser demanded. You shouldn't be running about in this weather.

Nuts and knuckles! sneered the boy in wheeled shoes. Forward all, my hearty crew! Panther Bill commands! He jabbed his walking-sticks down and off. The others followed, yelling and whooping.

Far too well-dressed to be street-arabs, Mallory remarked.

The boys had run off a short distance and were setting up for a game of crack-the-whip. Swiftly, each boy grabbed the next by the arm, forming a chain. The boy on wheels took the tail-end.

Don't like the look of that, Mallory muttered.

The chain of boys swung out across Camera Square, each link gathering impetus, and suddenly the wheel-footed boy shot loose from the end like a stone from a catapult. He skidded off with a scream of devilish glee, hit some small discontinuity in the pavement, and tripped headlong into a sheet of plate-glass.

Shards of glass burst from the store-front, toppling like guillotine blades.

Young Panther Bill lay upon the pavement, seemingly stunned or dead. There was an awful moment of shocked silence.

Treasure! shrilled one of the boys. With maddened shrieks, the pack scrambled for the broken store-front and began grabbing every display-item in sight telescopes, tripods, chemical glassware—

Halt! Fraser shouted. Police! He reached inside his coat, yanked his kerchief down, and sounded three sharp blasts on a nickel-plate police-whistle.

The boys fled instantly. A few dropped their snatched booty, but the rest clutched their prizes fiercely and ran like Barbary apes. Fraser hoofed it after them, Mallory at his heels, reaching the store-front where Panther Bill still lay sprawled. As they approached, the boy levered himself up on his elbow and shook his bleeding head.

You're hurt, son, Mallory said.

I'm right and fly! said Panther Bill sluggishly. His scalp was slashed to the bone and blood was pouring over both his ears. Hands off me, you masked bandits!

Belatedly, Mallory pulled his own kerchief down and tried to smile at the boy. You're injured, son. You need help. Together with Fraser, he bent over the boy.

Help! the boy screeched. Help me, my crew!

Mallory turned to look. Perhaps one of the other boys could be sent for aid.

A glittering triangular shard of flung glass spun from the fog, catching Fraser square in the back. The policeman jerked upright with a look of wide-eyed animal shock.

Panther Bill scrambled off on his hands and knees and jumped to his skidding feet. There was a loud smash from another store-front nearby, the musical clatter of glass, and delighted screams.

The glass-shard protruded in shocking fashion from Fraser's back. It was imbedded in him. They're going to kill us! Mallory cried, hauling Fraser along by the arm. Behind them glass was bursting like bombs, some of it flung blindly to shatter against the walls, some cascading from its shop-front mullions.

Bloody hell, Fraser muttered.

Panther Bill's cry rang through the fog. Treasure, my hearties! Treasure!

Clench your teeth, Mallory said. Folding his kerchief to protect his hand, he plucked the shard from Fraser's back. To his great relief, it came out of a piece. Fraser shuddered.

Mallory helped him gently out of his coat. Gore had streaked Fraser's shirt to the waistline, though it seemed not as bad as it might have been. The glass-shard had stabbed the chamois-leather strap of Fraser's shoulder-holster, which held a stout little pepperbox. Your holster stopped most of it, Mallory said. You're cut, but it's not deep, not through the ribs. We need to staunch that bleeding 

Police station, Fraser nodded, Kings Road West. He had gone very pale.

A fresh cascade of smashing glass echoed distantly behind them.

They walked on swiftly, Fraser wincing with each step. You'd better stay with me, he said. Spend the night at the police station. This has become very bad.

Surely, Mallory said. Don't trouble yourself.

I mean it. Mallory.

To be sure.

Two hours later Mallory was in Cremorne Gardens.


The document under analysis is a holographic letter. The letterhead has been removed, and the sheet was hastily folded. There is no date, but holographic analysis establishes that it is the genuine script of Edward Mallory, written in haste, and in a condition suggesting some loss of muscular coordination.

The paper-stock, of modest quality and badly yellowed by age, is of a sort in common governmental use in the mid-1850s. Its probable origin is the Kings Road West police station.

The text, in a badly faded ink from a pen-nib worn by long use, reads as follows



MADAME.


I have told no one. But someone must be told. I conclude that you must be my confidante, for there is no one else.

When I took your property into my safe-keeping, I did so freely. Your request is one I honor as I would a royal command, and your enemies are, of course, my own. It is the highest privilege of my life to act as your paladin.

Pray do not be alarmed for my safety. I beg you, take no steps on my behalf that might endanger yourself. Any risk in this battle I assume gladly, but there is indeed risk. Should the worst befall me, it is likely that your property would never be recovered.

I have examined the cards. I believe I have some inkling of their use, though they are far beyond my meager skill in Enginery. If this was an impertinence, I beg your pardon.

I have bound the cards securely in wrappings of clean linen, and personally sealed them away within an airtight container of plaster. That container is the skull of the Brontosaurus specimen in the Museum of Practical Geology in Jermyn Street. Your property now reposes in perfect safety some thirty feet above the ground. No human soul knows this, excepting yourself, and


Your Ladyship's most humble servant,

    EDWARD MALLORY, F.R.S., F.R.G.S.



FOURTH ITERATION

Seven Curses

This object is a patriotic funerary plaque in dense white porcelain, of the sort produced to commemorate the deaths of royalty and heads of state. Beneath an originally colorless glaze, cracked and yellowed by processes of time, are visible the features of Lord Byron.

Tens of thousands of these objects were sold throughout England during the months following the Prime Minister's death. The plaques themselves were of a standard manufacture, held in readiness for the demise of any sufficiently noted personage. The image of Byron, surrounded by wreaths, ornate scroll-work, and figures representative of the early history of the Industrial Radical Party, has been Engine-stippled upon a film of transparent material, which was then transferred to the plaque, glazed, and fired.

To Byron's left, amid stippled scroll-work, a crowned British lion poses rampant above the blurred coils of a defeated serpent, most probably meant to represent the Luddite cause.

It was sometimes remarked upon, both during and after Byron's rise to leadership, that his maiden speech in the House of Lords, February, 1812, urged clemency for the Luddites. Byron himself, questioned in this regard, is widely believed to have replied, But there were Luddites, sir, and then there were Luddites. While this remark may be apocryphal, it is wholly in keeping with what is known of the Prime Minister's personality, and would seem to refer to the extraordinary severity with which he later put down and suppressed the popular Manchester-based anti-industrial movement led by Walter Gerard. For this was a form of Luddism attacking, not the old order, but the order that the Rads themselves had established.

This object was once the property of Inspector Ebenezer Fraser, of the Bow Street Special Branch.


Mallory had stayed with Fraser, watching the police surgeon at work with dirty sponge and bandage, until he was sure that Fraser was fully distracted. To further ease Fraser's evident suspicions, Mallory had borrowed a sheet of police stationery and set to the task of composing a letter.

In the meantime, the Kings Road station had slowly filled with bellowing ruffian drunks and various species of rioter. It was very interesting as a social phenomenon, but Mallory was in no mood to spend the night on a cheerless cot in some raucous cell. His taste was most stubbornly set on something else entirely.

So he had politely asked directions of a harried and exhausted sergeant, noted them with care in his field-book, and eased out of the station. He'd had no problem finding Cremorne Gardens.

The situation there was nicely indicative of the city's crisis dynamic. It was quite calm. No one in the Gardens seemed aware of events beyond, the shock-waves of localized dissolution having not yet permeated the system.

And it did not stink so badly here. The Gardens were on the Chelsea Reach, well upstream of the worst of the Thames. There was a faint night-breeze off the river, somewhat fishy but not altogether unpleasant, and the fog was broken by the great leafy boughs of Cremorne's ancient elms. The sun had set, and a thousand cloudy gas-lights twinkled for the pleasure of the public.

Mallory could imagine the pastoral charm of the Gardens in happier times. The place had bright geranium-beds, plots of well-rolled lawn, pleasant vine-enshrouded kiosks, whimsical plaster follies, and of course the famous Crystal Circle. And the monster platform as well, a great roofed and wall-less ballroom, where thousands might have strolled or waltzed or polkaed on the shoe-streaked wooden deck. There were liquor-stands inside, and food, and a great horse-cranked panmelodium playing a medley of selections from favorite operas.

There were not, however, thousands present tonight. Perhaps three hundred people circulated listlessly, and no more than a hundred of these were respectable. This hundred were weary of confinement, Mallory assumed, or courting couples braving all unpleasantness to meet. Of the remainder, two-thirds were men, more or less desperate, and prostitutes, more or less brazen.

Mallory had two more whiskeys at the platform's bar. The whiskey was cheap and smelled peculiar, either tainted by the Stink or doctored with hartshorn or potash or quassia. Or perhaps indian-berry, for the stuff had the color of bad stout. The whiskey-shots sat in his stomach like a pair of hot coals.

There was only a bit of dancing going on, a few couples attempting a self-conscious waltz. Mallory was not much of a dancer at the best of times. He watched the women. A tall, finely shaped young woman danced with an older, bearded gentleman. The fellow was stout and looked gouty in his knees, but the woman stood tall as a dart and danced with as much grace as a professional, the brass heels of her dolly-boots glinting in the light. The sway of her petticoats suggested the shape and size of the haunches beneath. No padding or whalebone was there. She'd fine ankles in red stockings and her skirts were two inches higher than propriety allowed.

He could not see her face.

The panmelodium struck up another tune, but the stout gentleman seemed winded. The pair of them stopped and moved off among a group of friends an older, modest-looking woman in a bonnet, two other young girls who looked like dollymops, and another older gentleman who looked bleak-faced and foreign, from Holland perhaps or one of the Germanies. The dancing girl was talking with the others and tossing her head as if laughing. She had fine brunette hair and a bonnet knotted round her throat and hanging down her back. A fine, solid, womanly back and slim waist.

Mallory began walking slowly toward them. The girl talked with seeming earnestness to the foreign man, but his face showed reluctance and a seeming disdain. The girl sketched out something like a half-reluctant curtsey, then turned away from him.

Mallory saw her face for the first time. She had a strange long jaw, thick eyebrows, and a broad mobile slash of a mouth, lips edged with rouge. It was not exactly an ugly face, but decidedly plain. Yet there was a sharp, reckless look in her grey eyes and a strangely voluptuous expression that caught him as he stood. And she had a splendid form. He could see it as she walked—rolled, slid almost—to the bar. Again those marvelous hips and the line of that back. She leaned across the bar to chaff with the barman and her skirt rose behind her almost to her red-stockinged calf. The sight of her muscular leg thrilled him with a jolt of lewd intensity. It was as if she had kicked him with it.

Mallory moved to the bar. She was not chaffing with the barman but arguing with him, in a half-painful, nagging, womanly way. She was thirsty and had no cash and said that her friends were paying. The barman didn't believe her, but would not say so straight out.

Mallory tapped a shilling on the bar. Barman, give the lady what she wants.

She looked at him with annoyed surprise. Then she recovered herself, and smiled, and looked at him through half-shut lashes. You know what I like best, Nicholas, she told the barman.

He brought her a flute of champagne and relieved Mallory of his money. I love champagne, she told Mallory. You can dance like a feather when you drink champagne. Do you dance?

Abominably, Mallory said. May I go home with you?

She looked him up and down, and the corner of her mouth moved, with a wry but voluptuous smirk. I'll tell you in a moment. And she went to rejoin her friends.

Mallory did not wait, for he thought it likely a gull. He walked slowly about the monster promenade and looked at other women, but then he saw the tall plain-faced girl beckoning. He went to her.

I think I can go with you, but you may not like it, she said.

Why shouldn't I? he said. I like you.

She laughed. I don't mean in that way. I don't live here in Brompton; I live in Whitechapel.

That's a long way.

The trains aren't running. And we can't get a cab at all. I was afraid I would sleep in the park!

What about your friends? Mallory asked.

The girl tossed her head, as if to say she didn't care for them. Her fine neck showed a bit of machine-made lace at the hollow of her throat. I want to go back to Whitechapel. Will you take me? I haven't any money, not a tuppence.

All right, Mallory said. He offered her his arm. It's a five-mile walk—but your legs are a marvel.

She took his elbow and smiled at him. We can catch a river-steamer at Cremorne Pier.

Oh, Mallory said. Down the Thames, eh?

It's not very dear. They walked down the steps of the monster platform into the twinkling gas-lit darkness. You're not from London, are you? A traveling-gent.

Mallory shook his head.

Will you give me a sovereign if I sleep with you?

Mallory, surprised at her bluntness, said nothing.

You can stay all night, she said. I've a very nice room.

Yes, that's what I want.

He stumbled a bit on the gravel walk. She steadied him, then boldly met his eyes. You're a bit lushed, are you? But you look good-natured. What do they call you?

Edward. Ned, mostly.

That's my name, too! she said. Harriet Edwardes, with an 'e' on the end. My stage-name. But my friends call me Hetty.

You have the figure of a goddess, Hetty. I'm not surprised you're on the stage.

She gave him that bold, grey-eyed look. You like wicked girls, Ned? I hope you do, for I'm in a mood to do wicked things tonight.

I like them fine, Mallory said. He grabbed her by her tapered waist, thrust one hand against her swelling bosom, and kissed her mouth. She gave a little surprised shriek, and then threw her arms around his neck. They kissed a long while beneath the dark bulk of an elm. He felt her tongue against his teeth.

She pulled back a bit. We have to get home, Ned. All right?

All right, he said, breathing hard. But show me your legs now. Please?

She looked up and down the path, then lifted her petticoats to the knee and dropped them again.

They're perfection, he said. You could sit to painters.

I have sat to painters, she said, and it don't pay.

A steamer sounded at Cremorne Pier. They ran to it and got aboard with moments to spare. The effort sent whiskey racing through Mallory's head. He gave the girl a shilling to pay the four-pence toll, and found a canvas steamer-chair up near the bow. The little ferry got up steam, its side-wheels slapping black water. Let's go in the saloon, she said. There's drink.

I like to see London.

I don't think you'll like what you see on this trip.

I will if you stay with me, he said.

How you talk, Ned, she said, and laughed. Funny, I thought you were a copper at first, you looked so stern and solemn. But coppers don't talk like that, drunk or sober.

You don't like compliments?

No, they're sweet. But I like champagne, too.

In a moment, Mallory said. He was drunker than he liked to be. He stood and walked to the bow railing and gripped it hard, squeezing sensation back into his fingertips. Damned dark in the city, he said.

Why, it is, she said, standing near him. She smelled of salt sweat and tea-rose and cunt. He wondered if she had much hair there and what its color was. He was dying to see it. Why is that, Ned?

What?

Why is it so dark? Is it the fog?

Gas-lights, he said. Government have a scheme to turn off the gas-lights because they smoke so.

How clever of them.

Now people are running about in the blackened streets, smashing everything in sight.

How do you know that?

He shrugged.

You're not a copper?

No, Hetty.

I don't like coppers. They're always talking as if they know things you don't know. And they won't tell you how they know it.

I could tell you, Mallory said. I should like to tell you. But you wouldn't understand.

Of course I'd understand, Ned, Hetty said in a voice as bright as peeling paint. I love to hear clever men talk.

London is a complex system out of equilibrium. It's like—it's like a drunken man, blind drunk, in a room with whiskey bottles. The whiskey is hidden—so he's always walking about looking for it. When he finds a bottle, he takes a long drink, but puts it down and forgets it at once. Then he wanders and looks again, over and over.

Then he runs out of liquor and has to buy more, Hetty said.

No. He never runs out. There's a demon that tops up the bottles constantly. That's why it is an open dynamical system. He walks round and round in the room, forever, never knowing what his next step may be. All blind and unknowing, he traces circles, figure-eights, every figure that a skater might make, but he never leaves the boundaries. And then one day the lights go out, and he instantly runs headlong out of the room and into outer darkness. And anything may happen then, anything at all, for the outer darkness is Chaos. It is Chaos, Hetty.

And you like that, eh?

What?

I don't know what that means that you just said; but I can tell you like it. You like to think about it. With a gentle, quite natural movement, she put her hand against the front of his trousers. Isn't it stiff! She snatched her hand back and grinned triumphantly.

Mallory looked hastily about the deck. There were other people out, a dozen or so. It seemed none of them were watching, but it was hard to tell in the foggy darkness. You tease, he said.

Pull it out, and you'll see how I tease.

I'd rather wait for the proper time and place.

Fancy a man saying that, she said, and laughed.

The steady slapping paddle-wheels suddenly changed their tenor. The black Thames gave up a vile rush of stench and the crisping sound of bubbles.

Oh, it's horrid, cried Hetty, clapping a hand to her mouth. Let's go in the saloon, Ned, please!

A strange curiosity pinned Mallory in place. Does it get worse than this? Down-river?

Much worse, Hetty said through her fingers. I've seen folk swoon away.

Why do the ferries still run, then?

They always run, Hetty said, half-turning away. They're mail-boats.

Oh, Mallory said. Could I buy a stamp here?

Inside, said Hetty, and you can buy me something, too.


Hetty lit an oil-lamp in the cramped little hallway of her upstairs lodging in Flower-and-Dean Street. Mallory, powerfully glad to be free of the fog-choked eeriness of back-street Whitechapel, edged past her into the parlor. A square, plank-topped table held a messy stack of illustrated tabloids, somehow still delivered despite the Stink. In the dimness he could make out fat Engine-printed headlines bemoaning the poor state of the Prime Minister's health. Old Byron was always feigning sickness, some gammy foot or rheumy lung or raddled liver.

Hetty entered the parlor with her glowing lamp, and faded roses bloomed in the dusty wallpaper. Mallory dropped a gold sovereign on the table-top. He hated trouble in these matters, and always paid in advance. She noted the ring of the coin, smiling. Then she kicked off her street-muddied dolly-boots, and walked, swaying, to a doorway, which she flung open. A grey cat ran out, mewing, and she fussed at it, petting it and calling it Toby. She let it out to the stairs. Mallory watched her do this, and stood flat-footed in unhappy patience.

Well, then, come on with you, she said, tossing her plaited brown head.

The bedroom was small enough, and shabby, with a pressed-oak two-poster and a tall, tarnished cheval-glass that looked as if it had once cost some money. Hetty set the lamp on the badly delaminated veneer of a bedside commode and began to pick at the buttons of her blouse, pulling her arms from the sleeves and tossing the garment aside as if clothing were more trouble to her than she cared for. Stepping deftly out of her skirt, she began to remove her corset and a stiff crinkled petticoat.

You wear no crinoline, Mallory noted hoarsely.

Don't like 'em. She popped the waistband of the petticoat and laid it aside. She deftly picked the wire hooks of the corset and eased its laces open, then wriggled it over her hips and stood there, breathing in relief, in her lace chemise.

Mallory got out of his jacket and shoes. His member strained at his fly-buttons. He was anxious to get it out of his trousers, but didn't care to parade his erect prick by lamplight.

Hetty jumped into the bed in her chemise, the worn springs complaining loudly. Mallory sat on the edge of the bed, which smelled powerfully of cheap orange-water and Hetty's sweat, and got his trousers and unmentionables off, leaving himself in his shirt.

Leaning off the bed, he unbuttoned one compartment of his money-belt and removed a French-letter. I'll do it in armor, dear, he muttered. Is that all right?

Hetty sat up brightly on her elbow. Let me see it, then. Mallory showed her the rolled membrane of sheep-gut. It isn't one of those queer ones, she noted, with apparent relief. Do as you like, dearie.

Mallory carefully peeled the device over the taut skin of his prick. This was better. Mallory thought, happier for this act of foresight. It felt more as if he knew what he was doing here, and that he would be safe after all, and get his money's worth as well. He climbed under the dingy sheet.

Hetty wrapped her strong arms around his neck and kissed him fiercely with her great crooked mouth, as if she meant to glue it to him. Mallory, startled, felt her tongue writhing about on his teeth like a slick warm eel. The strange sensation powerfully stimulated his virility. He struggled atop her, her solid flesh feeling marvelous through the obscenely thin veil of the chemise, and fought with the garment till he had it up about her waist. Hetty made enthusiastic groaning noises as Mallory groped about in the damp fleece between her legs. Finally, seeming impatient, Hetty reached down without ceremony and jammed his prick into her cunt.

She stopped sucking his mouth as they began to rut. Soon they were breathing like steam-gurneys, the bed creaking and jouncing beneath them like a badly tuned panmelodium. Oh, Ned, darling! she yelped suddenly, setting eight sharp fingernails into his back. What a fine big one it is! I'm going to spend! And she writhed under him in near-convulsion. Jolted by the strangeness of a woman speaking English in the midst of sexual congress, he spent abruptly, as if the seed were wrenched unwilling from his flesh by the hard lewd plunging of her loins.

After a quiet, panting moment, Hetty kissed his bearded cheek with the half-shy lash-fluttering look of a woman conquered by desire. That was fine indeed, Ned. You really do know how to do it. Now let's have something to eat, shall we? I'm bloody starving.

Good, Mallory said, rolling off the sweaty cradle of her hips. He felt grateful to her, as he always did to any woman who had favored him, and a bit ashamed of himself, and of her as well. But very hungry, too. He had not eaten in many hours.

We can get a nice petit-souper downstairs from the Hart. Mrs. Cairns can fetch it up for us. She's my landlady what lives next door.

Fine, Mallory said.

You'll have to pay for it and tip her, though. Hetty rolled from bed, her chemise rucked up. She tugged it loose, but the glimpse of her magnificent backside sent a wash of gratified amazement through him. She knuckle-thumped the bedroom wall in quick staccato. After a slow moment there was an answering knock.

Your friend's up late? Mallory said.

She's used to this business, Hetty told him, sliding back in bed with a chorus of squeaks. Never you mind Mrs. Cairns. She mills her poor husband about every Wednesday and keeps the whole building awake.

Mallory carefully removed his French-letter, which had stretched out of shape but not torn, and dropped it into the pot-de-chambre. Should we open a window? It's damned hot 

No, don't let in the Stink, dearie! Hetty grinned in the lamplight, and scratched herself beneath the sheet. Anyway, the windows don't open.

Why not?

The casements are all nailed tight. The girl who used to live here, last winter Queer little thing, with a po-face and fine gentry airs, but awful frightened of her enemies. She nailed all the windows shut, I think. They finally got her even so, poor creature.

How is that, then? Mallory asked.

Oh, she never brought her men here, that I ever saw, but finally the coppers came here looking for her. Specials, if you know the kind I mean. And they gave me a sharp time of it too, the bastards, as if I knew what she did, or who her friends were. I didn't even know her real name. Sybil something. Sybil Jones.

Mallory tugged at his beard. What did she do, this Sybil Jones?

She had a child by an M.P. when she was young, Hetty said. Fellow name of, well, I doubt you want to know. She was a politician's tart, who used to sing a bit. Me, I'm a tart who poses. Connaissez-vous poses plastiques?

No. Mallory noted without surprise that a flea had landed on his bare knee-cap. He caught it, then cracked it bloodily between his thumbnails.

We dress in tight leotards colored just like skin, and swan about and let gentlemen gawk at us. Mrs. Winterhalter—you saw her tonight in Cremorne, bossing us about—she's my manageress, as they say. The crowd was dreadful thin tonight, and those Swede diplomats we was with are as tight as a chicken's arse. So it was a bit of luck for me that you showed.

A rapping came at the door of the hall. Hetty rose. Donnez-moi four shillings, she said. Mallory gave her some coins, which swiftly vanished as she left. Hetty returned with a dented and chipped japanned tray and displayed a misshapen loaf of bread, a lump of ham, mustard, four fried sausages, and a dusty split of warm champagne.

Filling two stained champagne-flutes, she began to eat her supper, quite composedly, without speaking. Mallory gazed fixedly at her dimpled arms and shoulders and the swell of her heavy, dark-nippled breasts in the thin chemise, and wondered a bit about the plainness of her face. He drank a glass of the acrid, bad champagne, and ate the greenish ham in famished mouthfuls.

Hetty finished the sausages. Then, with a crooked smile, she slid out of bed, and squatted by its side, hoisting the chemise to her waist. That champagne runs right through you, don't it? I need the pot. Don't look unless you want to. Mallory looked aside politely and listened to the rattle of piss.

Let's wash, she said. I'll fetch a basin. She came back with an enameled pan of reeking London water, and sponged at herself with a loofah.

Your form is splendid, Mallory said. Her hands and feet were small, but the columnar roundness of her calves and thighs were marvels of mammalian anatomy. Her great solid buttocks were faultless. They seemed weirdly familiar to him, like the white female buttocks he had seen in a dozen historical canvases. It occurred to him that likely they were the very same. Her neat-lipped cunt was furred with auburn hair.

She smiled at his stare. Would you like to see me naked?

Very much.

For a shilling?

All right.

She threw off her chemise with apparent relief, sweat standing out all over her. She sponged tenderly at her dripping armpits. I can stand in pose, not moving at all, for full five minutes at a time, she said, slurring a bit. She had drunk nearly all of the champagne. Have you a watch? Ten shilling an' I'll do it! Do you bet I can?

I'm sure you can do it, Mallory said.

Hetty bent gracefully, grasped her left ankle, and lifted it straight above her head, her leg stiff at the knee. She began spinning about, slowly, shuffling on heel and toe. You like it?

Wonderful, Mallory said, stunned.

Look, I can put both my hands quite flat on the floor, she said, bending at the waist. Most London girls are so tight-laced they'd break in bloody half if they tried this. Then she went into a split on the floor, and gazed up at him, drunken and triumphant.

I never lived till I came to London, Mallory said.

Take off your shirt, then, and let's fuck starkers. Her long-jawed face was flushed, her grey eyes bulging. Mallory took his shirt off. She advanced on him with the enamel basin. Fucking naked's fine in beastly hot weather like this. I always like to fuck naked. My, you have fine firm flesh on you, an' I do like a man with some hairiness. Let's have a look at your prick. She grabbed it forthrightly, skinned it back and examined it, then dabbled it in the basin. You're not sick, dear—there's nothing wrong with you, it's quite a fine one. Why not fuck me without that nasty sausage-skin and save yourself nine pence?

Nine pence isn't much, Mallory said. He put on another French-letter, then mounted her. He rutted nakedly, sweating like a blacksmith. The sweat was pouring off the both of them, with a reek of bad champagne, yet the sticky skin of her great teats felt quite cool against his naked chest. She galloped along under him, her eyes shut and her tongue showing at the corner of her crooked mouth, and put the backs of her heels sharply into his buttocks. At last he spent, groaning between clenched teeth at the burning rush through his prick. There was a roaring in his ears.

You're a bawdy devil, my Ned, and sure. Her neck and shoulders were red with prickly heat.

So are you, Mallory gasped.

I am, dear, and I like to do it with a man who knows how to treat a girl. Let's have some nice bottled ale, then. More cooling than that champagne.

All right. Fine.

And some papirosi. Do you like papirosi?

What are those, exactly?

Turkish cigarettoes, from the Crimea. They're all the rage since the war.

You smoke tobacco? Mallory asked, surprised.

I learnt it from Gabrielle, she said, climbing from bed. Gabrielle, she lived here after Sybil left. She was a Frenchie from Marseilles. But she sailed to French Mexico last month, with one of her embassy soldiers. She married him, lucky thing. Hetty wrapped herself in a robe-de-nuit of yellow silk. In the lantern-light it looked a fine garment, despite its frayed hems. Sweet she was, Gabrielle. Donnez-moi four shillings, dear. No, five.

Can you change a pound-note? Mallory said. Hetty gave him fifteen shillings, with a sour look, and vanished into the parlor.

She was absent a long time—chatting with Mrs. Landlord, it seemed. Mallory lay at ease in her bed, listening to strange distant echoes of the great metropolis bells ringing, distant high-pitched cries, bangs that might be gunshots. He was as drunk as a Lordship, it seemed, and Lordship felt mortal fine. The weight would be back on his heart soon enough, and no doubt redoubled for the sin, but for the moment fleshly pleasure had lifted him, and he felt quite free and feather-light.

Hetty returned with a wire crate of bottles in one hand, puffing a lit cigarette with the other.

You took a long time, he said.

She shrugged. A bit of trouble downstairs. Some ruffians. She set the crate down, pulled a bottle out, and flung it to him. Feel how cool—they keep these in the cellar. Nice, ain't it?

Mallory unloosed the complex stopper of porcelain, cork, and levered wire, and thirstily drank. NEWCASTLE ALE, the bottle said, in molded letters of raised glass. A modern brewery where they made the liquor in great steel vats near the size of a ship-of-the-line. Fine machine-made brew, free of any cheater's taint of jalap or indian-berry.

Hetty got into the bed in her robe, drained the last of a bottle, and opened another. Take the robe off, Mallory said.

You didn't give me my shilling.

Here, then.

She slipped the coin under the mattress, and smiled. You're a rum'un, Neddie. I like you. She took the robe off, flung it at the iron coat-hook on the back of the door, missed. I'm in a rare mood tonight. Let's have another go.

In a bit, Mallory said, and yawned. His lids felt heavy suddenly, grainy. The back of his head throbbed, where Velasco had smacked him, it seemed an age ago. It seemed an age since he had done anything but drink and rut.

Hetty gripped his limp prick and began to fondle it. When did you last have a woman, Ned?

Ah two months, I think. Three.

And who was she?

She was She had been a whore in Canada, but Mallory suddenly stopped. Why do you ask?

Tell me. I like to hear about it. I like to know what the fancy do.

I don't know anything about that. Nor do you, I imagine.

Hetty released his prick and folded her arms. She leaned back against the headboard, then lit another papirosi, scraping her lucifer against a rough patch of plaster. She blew smoke through her oddly shaped nose—a disconcerting sight, for Mallory. You don't think I know anything, she said. I've heard such things as you don't imagine, I'll wager. No doubt, Mallory said politely. He finished his ale.

Did you know that old Lady Byron flogs her husband naked? His prick won't stand till she beats him on the arse with a German riding-crop, and I'd that straight from a copper, who was sweet on me, who had it from an upstairs servant in the household!

Oh?

That Byron family is dead bawdy and wicked to the core. He's too old now, but in his younger days he'd fuck a sheep, Lord Byron would. He'd fuck a bush if he thought a sheep was in it! His wife's no better. She doesn't fuck other men, but she's of the flogging sisterhood.

Remarkable,  Mallory said. What about their daughter, then?

Hetty said nothing for a moment. He was surprised at the sudden gravity of her expression. She's dead flash, Ada is. She's the greatest whore in all of London.

Why do you say that?

Because she fucks whoever she pleases, and none dare make a peep about what she does. She's had half the House of Lords, and they all tag at her skirts like little boys. And call themselves her favorites and her paladins, and if any man breaks troth and dares breathe a word against her, then the others see to it that he comes to a very bad end. They all ring round her, and protect her, and worship her like Romish priests do their Madonna.

Mallory grunted. It was whore's talk, not a proper thing to say. He knew that Lady Ada had her gallants, but the thought that she let men have her, that there was shoving and spending, prick and cunt in the mathematical bed of the Queen of Engines Best not to think about it. His head had a whiskey-spin, somehow.

Your expertise is impressive, Hetty, Mallory muttered. You certainly command the data of your trade 

Hetty, who had been guzzling at another bottle of ale, laughed explosively. Foam splattered her chest. Oh, Christ, she said, coughing, and smearing at her breasts. Lor', Neddie, how you do talk. Look what you made me do.

Sorry, Mallory said.

She gave him a fleering grin and picked her smoldering cigarette from the edge of the bureau. Get the rag and give 'em a good wash, she suggested. I'll bet you'd like that, eh?

Without a word, Mallory stooped to his work. He fetched the basin, and sopped the hand-towel, scrubbing the wet terry carefully over her breasts and the fat, navel-dimpled white rise of her belly. Hetty watched with hooded eyes, puffing at her cigarette and flicking ashes on the floor, as if her flesh belonged to someone else. After a while, she silently gripped his prick, working it back and forth encouragingly as he wiped at her legs.

Mallory put on another sheath, with some clumsy fumbling, almost losing his erection as he did so. To his relief, he managed to enter her, where he soon regained stiffness in her welcoming flesh, and thumped hard at her, tired and drunk, with an ache in his arms and his wrists and his back, and a strange painful tingling at the root of his prick. The glans felt quite sore, almost painfully tender within its sheep-gut armor, and to spend seemed as hard and tricky as pulling a rusty nail. The bed-springs creaked like a field of metal crickets. Halfway through, Mallory felt as if he had run for miles, and Hetty, whose dead cigarette had burnt the bureau, seemed entranced, or perhaps only stunned, or drunk. For a moment he wondered if he should simply stop, quit, tell her somehow that it simply wasn't working, but he could not even begin to find the words that would satisfactorily explain this situation, so he sawed on. His mind wandered, to another woman, a cousin of his, a red-haired girl whom he had seen being shagged behind a Sussex hedgerow, when he had been up a tree as a boy, hunting cuckoo's eggs. The red-haired cousin had married the man, and was forty years old now with grown children, a round little proper woman in a round little proper bonnet, but Mallory never met her without remembering the tortured look of pleasure on her freckled face. He clutched that secret image now like a galley-slave to his oar, and fought his way stubbornly toward a climax. Finally, there was that melting, cresting feeling in his loins that told him that he would, in fact, spend soon, that nothing would hold him back, and he shoved on with a new desperation, panting very hard, and the agonized rush of spending came up his aching spine like a rocket, a surge of shocking pleasure in his arms, in his legs, even in the naked soles of his cramping feet, and he cried out, a loud ecstatic bestial groan that surprised him.

Lordy, Hetty commented.

Mallory collapsed off of her and lay blowing like a beached cetacean in the foetid air. His muscles felt like rubber, and he'd half-sweated the whiskey off with the sheer work of it. He felt utterly wonderful. He felt quite willing to die. If the tout had arrived and shot him on the spot he would somehow have welcomed it, welcomed the opportunity never to come back from that plateau of sensibility, the opportunity never to be Edward Mallory again, but only a splendid creature drowned in cunt and tea-rose.

But after a moment the feeling was gone and he was Mallory again. Too stupefied for any refinements of guilt or regret. Mallory nevertheless felt ready to leave. Some unspoken crisis had passed, and the episode was finished. He was simply too tired to move just yet, but he knew that he was about to. The whore's bedroom no longer felt like any kind of haven to him. The walls seemed unreal, mere mathematical abstractions, boundaries that could no longer restrain his momentum.

Let's sleep a bit, Hetty said, her words blurred with drink and exhaustion.

All right. He sensibly set the box of lucifers within convenient reach, turned out the lantern, and lay in the hot London dark like a suspended Platonic soul. He rested, eyes open, a flea feasting with leisurely precision on his ankles. He did not sleep, exactly, but rested for some indefinite time. When his mind began to run in circles, he lit and smoked one of Hetty's cigarettoes, a pleasant ritual, though without much point as far as the proper use of tobacco went. Later he left the bed and pissed in the pot-de-chambre, by feel. Ale had spilled on the floor there, or perhaps it was something else. He would have liked to wipe his feet, but there seemed little point.

He waited for something akin to dawn to show at Hetty's bare and grimy casement, which gazed out gloomily at a nearby wall. At length there came a feeble glow, not much at all like honest daylight. He had sobered now, and lay there parched, his head feeling stuffed with gun-cotton. Not at all bad, really, if he didn't move it suddenly, but full of grim premonitory throbs.

He lit the bedside candle, found his shirt. Hetty woke with a groan, and stared at him, her hair snarled and sweaty, her eyes bulging with a look that almost frightened him—ellynge, they would have called it in Sussex—fey. You're not going, she said.

Yes.

Why? It's so dark, still.

I prefer an early start. He paused. An old camp habit.

Hetty snorted. Get back in bed, my brave soldier, don't be silly. Stay a bit. We'll wash and have breakfast. You can get that, can't you? A nice big breakfast?

I'd rather not. It's late, I must go, I have business.

How late? she yawned. Not even dawn yet.

It's late. I'm certain of it.

What does Big Ben say?

I haven't heard Ben all night, Mallory said, the recognition surprising him. Government have shut it down, I suppose.

This bit of speculation seemed to vaguely alarm Hetty. French breakfast, then, she suggested, sent up from downstairs. Pastry, pot o' coffee. It's cheap.

He shook his head.

Hetty paused, narrowed her eyes. The refusal seemed to have startled her. She sat up, the bed creaking, and tugged at her disordered hair. Don't go out, the weather's dreadful. If you can't sleep, dear, then let's fuck.

I don't think I can.

I know you like me, Neddie. She raised the sweat-dampened sheet. Come and feel me all over, that will make it stand. She lay there waiting, with the sheet up.

Mallory, unwilling to disappoint, came toward her, patted her lovely haunches, and groped about the luscious smoothness of her breasts. Her flesh delighted his touch, but his prick, though it stirred, did not stand. I really must go, he said.

It will stand again if you wait a bit.

I can't stay anymore.

I would not do this if you were not such a nice man, Hetty said slowly, but I can make it stand right now if you like; connaissez-vous la belle gamahuche?

What's that, then?

Well, she said, if you'd been with Gabrielle instead of me, you'd have had it by now; she always did it with her men, and said they were mad for it; it's what they call gamahuching, the French pleasure.

I'm not sure I understand.

Prick-sucking.

Oh. That. He had heard the term, though only as the foulest kind of abusive curse, and was startled to find himself in a situation where it might be performed as a physical act. He tugged at his beard. Ah how much would that cost?

I wouldn't do it for any price, for some, she assured him, but I do like you, Ned, and for you I'd do it.

How much?

She blinked. Ten shillings?

Half-a-pound. I don't think so, he said.

Well, all right, five shillings, if you don't finish there. But you have to promise that, and I mean it.

The implications of this proposal gave him an exquisite thrill of disgust. No, I don't care for that. He began to dress.

You'll come again then? When will you see me?

Soon.

She sighed, knowing he was lying. Go then, if you must. But listen, Neddie, I do know you like me. And I don't remember your proper name exactly, but I know I've seen your portrait in the papers. You're a famous savant, and you have a deal of tin. I'm right about that, aren't I?

Mallory said nothing.

She hurried on. A fellow like you can get in bad trouble with the wrong sort of London girl. But you're safe as houses with Hetty Edwardes, for I only go with gentlemen, and I'm very discreet.

I'm sure that you are, Mallory said, dressing hastily.

I dance Tuesdays and Thursdays at the Pantascopic Theatre, down Haymarket. Will you come and see me?

If I'm in London.

He left her then, and felt his way out of the place. On his hasty way to the stairs he bloodily scraped his shin on the pedal of someone's chained bicycle.


The sky above the Hart was like nothing Mallory had ever seen, yet he knew it. He had seen such a sky with his mind's-eye, a lowering dome abrim with explosive filth, awash with obliterating dust—a sky that was the very harbinger of Catastrophe.

By the twilight blur of the fully risen sun he reckoned it near eight o'clock. Dawn had come, yet brought no day. The Land Leviathans had seen this very sky, he knew, after the earth-shaking shock of the Great Comet. For the scaly herds, ceaselessly progressing through the teeming jungles, driven always by a mighty hunger in their great fermenting bellies, this had been the sky of Armageddon. Storms of Cataclysm lashed the Cretaceous earth, vast fires raged, and cometary grit sifted through the roiling atmosphere, to blight and kill the wilting foliage, till the mighty Dinosauria, adapted to a world now shattered, fell in massed extinction, and the leaping machineries of Evolution were loosed in chaos, to re-populate the stricken Earth with strange new orders of being.

He scuffed down Flower-and-Dean Street, awestruck, coughing. He could see little more than thirty feet ahead, for the alley roiled with a low-lying yellow fog that blurred his eyes with its clinging acid tang.

More by luck than design, he emerged on Commercial Street, ordinarily a thriving Whitechapel avenue. Deserted now, its smooth tarmac was spread with fountained shards of shop-front glass.

He walked a block, then another. There was scarcely a window intact. Cobbles, grubbed up from side-streets, had been flung right and left like a shower of meteors. A seeming whirlwind had descended on a nearby grocery, leaving the street ankle-deep in dirty snow-drifts of flour and sugar. Mallory picked his way through battered cabbages, squashed greengages, crushed jars of syrupped peaches, and the booted footballs of whole smoked hams. Scatterings of damp flour showed a stampede of men's brogues, the small bare feet of street-urchins, the dainty trace of women's shoes, and the sweep of their skirt-hems.

Four mist-shrouded figures, three men and a woman, all dressed respectably, all carefully masked in thick cloth, came shuffling into view. Noticing him, they pointedly crossed the street. They moved slowly, unhurriedly, talking together in low tones.

Mallory moved on, splintered glass crunching under his shoe-heels. Meyer's Gent's Furnishings, Peterson's Haberdashery, LaGrange's Parisian Pneumatique Launderette, all presented disintegrated store-fronts and doors torn off their hinges. Their fronts had been thoroughly pelted with stones, with bricks, with raw eggs.

Now a more cohesive group appeared. Men and young boys, some rolling heaped barrows, though they were clearly not costers. In their masks, they seemed tired, bemused, somber, as though attending a funeral. In their aimless progress they slowed before a sacked cobbler's, picking over the scattered shoes with the limp enthusiasm of scavengers.

Mallory realized that he had been a fool. While he had wallowed in mindless dissipation, London had become a locus of anarchy. He should be home in peaceful Sussex now, with the family. He should be readying for little Madeline's wedding, in clean country air, with his brothers and sisters at hand, with decent home-cooked food and decent homely drink. A sudden agony of homesickness struck him, and he wondered what chaotic amalgam of lust and ambition and circumstance had marooned him in this dreadful, vicious place. He wondered what the family were doing at that very moment. What was the time, exactly?

With a jolt, Mallory remembered Madeline's clock. His sister's wedding-gift was sitting in its brass-hasped carry-case in the safety-box of the Palace of Paleontology. The lovely fancy clock for dear Madeline, now grotesquely out of his reach. The Palace was seven miles from Whitechapel. Seven miles of roiling chaos.

There must be some way back, some way to cross that distance, surely. Mallory wondered if any of the city's trains were running, or the omnibuses. Perhaps a hansom? Horses would choke in this foul mist. He was down to shank's mare. Likely any effort to cross London was foolish, and likely it would be wisest to cower in some quiet cellar like a rat, hoping for Catastrophe to pass him over. And yet Mallory found his shoulders squaring, his legs tramping forward of their own accord. Even the throbbing in his parched head began to pass as his wits focused on a goal. Back to the Palace. Back to his life.

Hullo! Say there! Sir! The voice echoed over Mallory's head like the cry of a bad conscience. He glanced up, startled.

From a third-floor window of Jackson Bros., Furriers & Hatters, protruded the black barrel of a rifle. Behind it, Mallory made out the balding head of a spectacled shopping-clerk, leaning from his open window now to reveal a striped shirt and scarlet braces.

May I be of service? Mallory called, the phrase emerging out of reflex.

Thank you, sir! the clerk cried, his voice cracking. Sir, could you, please, have a look at our door there—just to the side, below the steps? I believe—there may be someone hurt!

Mallory waved one hand in reply, walked to the shop's entrance. Its double-doors were intact but badly battered, dripping splattered eggs. A young man in a sailor's striped blouse and bell-bottomed trousers lay sprawled there, facedown, a pry-bar of forged iron near his hand.

Mallory seized the shoulder of the sailor's coarse blouse and turned him over. A bullet had taken him through the throat. He was quite dead, and his nose had been mashed to one side by the pavement, giving his bloodless young face a bizarre cast, so that he seemed to have come from some nameless country of sea-going albinos.

Mallory straightened. You've shot him dead! he shouted upward.

The clerk, seeming rattled, began coughing loudly, and made no reply.

Mallory spied the wooden butt of a pistol tucked in the dead sailor's intricately knotted sash; he tugged it out. A revolver of unfamiliar make, its massive cylinder curiously slotted and grooved. The long octagonal barrel, under-hung with a sort of piston, stank of black-powder. He glanced at the furrier's battered door. Clearly an entire mob had been at it, an armed mob, bent on the worst kind of mischief. The wretches must have scattered when the sailor had been shot.

He stepped into the street, waving the pistol. The rascal was armed! he shouted. You did well to—

A bullet from the clerk's rifle screamed off a cement stair-step, bleaching it white with impact and narrowly missing Mallory on the ricochet.

God blame ye, ye cack-handed fool! Mallory bellowed. Stop that this instant!

There was a moment's silence. Sorry, sir! the clerk cried.

What in hell do you think you're doing?

I said I was sorry! You best throw away that gun, though, sir!

The hell I will! Mallory roared, slipping the pistol into the waistband of his trousers. He meant to demand that the clerk come down and decently cover the dead man, but he thought better of it as other windows rattled up on their casters, four more rifle barrels appearing in defense of Jackson Bros.

Mallory backed up, showing empty hands and attempting to smile. When the fog had thickened around him, he turned and ran.

Now he moved more cautiously, keeping to the center of the street. He discovered a trampled cambric shirt and cut its baggy sleeve loose with the small saw-tooth blade of his Sheffield knife. It made a serviceable mask.

He examined the sailor's revolver, and plucked a blackened cartridge-case from the cylinder. It still held five shots. It was a clumsy thing, foreign, unevenly blued, though the mechanism looked to have been executed with a decent degree of accuracy. He made out BALLESTER-MOLINA, stamped faintly on the side of the octagonal barrel, but there were no other markings.

Mallory emerged on Aldgate High Street, recalling it from his walk with Hetty from the London Bridge pier, though it looked, if anything, more eerie and horrid than it had in the middle of the night. The mob did not seem to have touched it as yet, in the inherent vagary of Chaos.

A rhythmic clanging of alarm sounded from the fog behind him. He stepped aside to watch a fire-gurney steam past, its red-painted sides battered and dented. Some London mob had brutally attacked the firemen, attacked the trained men and machines that stood between the city and mass conflagration. This struck Mallory as the acme of perverse stupidity, yet somehow it failed to surprise him. Exhausted firemen clung to the gurney's running-boards, wearing bizarre rubber masks with gleaming eye-pieces and accordioned breathing-tubes. Mallory dearly wished for such a mask himself, for his eyes were misting so painfully now that he squinted like a pantomime pirate, but he tramped on.

Aldgate became Fenchurch, then Lombard, then Poultry Street, and still he was miles from his goal, if the Palace of Paleontology could be said to be one. His head pounded and swam with the sullen lees of bad whiskey and worse air, and he seemed to be nearer the Thames now, for a damp and viscous taint arose that sickened him.

On Cheapside, a city omnibus had been toppled on its side and set afire with its own boiler-coals. Every window in it had been shattered, and it had burnt to a blackened husk. Mallory hoped no one had died inside it. The smoking wreckage stank too fiercely for him to want to look more closely.

There were people in the churchyard of St. Paul's. The air seemed somewhat clearer there, for the dome was visible, and a large crowd of men and boys had collected among the churchyard trees. Unaccountably, they seemed in the highest spirits. Mallory perceived to his astonishment that they were brazenly tossing dice on the very steps of Wren's masterpiece.

A little farther on, and Cheapside itself was blocked by scattered crowds of eager and determined gamblers. Fairy-rings of rascals had sprouted left and right from the very pavement, men kneeling to guard their mounting stakes of coins and paper-money. Eager leaders in mischief, tough, squint-eyed cockneys who seemed to have leapt whole from the coagulated Stink of London, cried aloud, hoarsely, like patterers, as Mallory passed. A shilling to open! Who'll shoot? Who will shoot, my lads? From the scattered rings came cries of triumph at winning, angry groans muffled by masks.

For each man boldly gambling, there were three who timidly watched. A carnival attraction, it seemed, a stinking and criminal carnival, but a London lark nonetheless. There were no police in sight, no authority, no decency. Mallory edged warily through the thin, excited crowd, a cautious hand on the butt of the sailor's pistol. In an alley, two masked men booted a third, then relieved him of his watch and wallet. A crowd of at least a dozen watched the sight with only mild interest.

These Londoners were like a gas, thought Mallory, like a cloud of minute atomies. The bonds of society broken, they had simply flown apart, like the perfectly elastic gassy spheres in Boyle's Laws of Physics. Most of them looked respectable enough by their dress; they were merely reckless now, stripped by Chaos to a moral vacuity. Most of them, Mallory thought, had never seen any event remotely like this one. They had no proper standards left for judgment or comparison. They had become puppets of base impulse.

Like the Cheyenne tribesmen of Wyoming, dancing in the devil's grip of drink, the goodmen of civilized London had surrendered themselves to primitive madness. And by the patent look of surprised bliss on their shining faces, Mallory perceived that they enjoyed it. They enjoyed it very greatly indeed. It was exaltation to them, a wicked freedom more perfect and desirable than any they had ever known.

Along the edge of the crowd a line of gaudy handbills had been newly slapped-up across a formerly sacrosanct brick wall of Paternoster Row. They were adverts of the cheapest and most ubiquitous kind, the sort that pursued the eye all over London PROFESSOR RENBOURNE'S MAGNETIC HEADACHE PILLS, BEARDSLEY'S SHREDDED CODFISH, MCKESSON & ROBBINS' TARTARLITHINE, ARNICA TOOTH SOAP And some theatrical prints MADAME SCAPIGLIONI at the Saville House in Leicester Square, a VAUXHALL PANMELODIUM SYMPHONY Events, Mallory thought, that would surely never come off, and indeed the sheets had been posted with a careless haste that had badly wrinkled the paper. Fresh glue dripped from beneath the bills in rivulets of white ooze, a sight that perturbed Mallory in a way he could not define.

But slapped amid these mundane bills, as if it belonged there by right, was a great three-sheet broadside, a thing the size of a horse-blanket. Engine-printed, rumpled in the hasty plastering. Indeed, its very ink seemed still damp.

A mad thing.

Mallory stopped dead before it, stricken by its crude bizarrity. It had been done in three colors—scarlet, black, and an ugly greyish-pink that seemed a muddle of the two.

A scarlet blindfolded woman—a Goddess of Justice?—in a blurry scarlet toga brandished a scarlet sword labeled LUDD over the pinkish-grey heads of two very crudely rendered figures, a man and a woman depicted in busts—a king and queen? Lord and Lady Byron perhaps? The scarlet goddess trampled the midsection of a large two-headed snake, or scaly dragon, its writhing body labeled MERIT-LORDSHIP. Behind the scarlet woman, the skyline of London was vigorously aflame in scarlet tongues of fire, while the sky all about the various demented figures was full of stylized scrolls of thick black cloud. Three men, clergymen or savants apparently, dangled from a gallows in the upper-right-hand corner, and in the upper-left a confused mass of ill-formed gesticulating figures waved flags and Jacobin pikes, advancing toward some unknown goal under the bearded star of a comet.

And this was not the half of it. Mallory rubbed at his aching eyes. The vast rectangular sheet seethed with smaller images like a billiard-table littered with random pool-balls. Here a dwarfish wind-god blew out a cloud labeled PESTILENCE. There a cannon-shell, or bomb, exploded in stylized spiky fragments, small black misshapen imps being flung aside by the blast. A coffin heaped with flowers held a noose atop it. A nude woman crouched at the feet of a monster, a well-dressed man with the head of a reptile. A tiny praying man in epaulets stood on a gallows, while the hangman, a little fellow with a hood and his sleeves rolled up, gestured brusquely at the noose More of the smudgy smoke-clouds, flung onto the image like mud, connected the whole business like the dough of a fruit-cake. And there was text, too, near the bottom. A title, in large smudgy Engine-type THE SEVEN CURSES OF THE WHORE OF BABYLONDON!

Babylondon. Baby what? What curses, and why seven? The sheet seemed flung together out of random chunks of Engine-imagery. Mallory knew that modern printers had special printers' punch-cards, clacked-up to print specific blocky pictures, much like the cheap woodcut-blocks on old murder-ballads. In the Engine-work of the catchpenny prints you might see the same hackneyed picture a hundred times. But here the colors were hideous, the images jammed hither and thither in apparent madness, and worst of all the broadsheet seemed to be attempting to express something, in however halting and convulsive a way, that was simply and truly unspeakable.

Be ye talkin' a' me? demanded a man next to Mallory.

Mallory jumped a bit, startled. Nothing, he muttered.

The man loomed nearer at Mallory's shoulder, a very tall, gaunt cockney, with lank, filthy yellow hair under a towering stovepipe hat. He was drunk, for his eyes were maddened and bright. His face was masked securely in polka-dot fabric. His dirty clothes were near-rags—save the shoes, which were stolen and spanking-new. The cockney reeked with days of unwashed sweat, the stink of dereliction, madness. He squinted hard at the broadsheet, then at Mallory again. Friends of yours, squire?

No, Mallory said.

Tell me what it means! the cockney insisted. I heard you a-talking over it. You do know, don't you?

The man's sharp voice trembled, and when he looked from the poster to Mallory again the bright accusing eyes above the mask seemed kindled with animal hate.

Get away from me! Mallory shouted.

Blasphemin' Christ the Savior! the tall man screeched, his voice rising, his gnarled hands kneading the air. Christ's holy blood, what washed us free o' sin—

He reached for Mallory. Mallory knocked the grasping hand away.

Kill 'im! an anonymous voice suggested eagerly. The gloating words charged the sullen air like a Leyden-jar. Suddenly, Mallory and his opponent were in the midst of a crowd—no longer random particles, but the focus of real trouble. The tall cockney, half-shoved perhaps, stumbled into Mallory. Mallory doubled him up with a punch to the breadbasket. Someone screamed then, a high hilarious bloodcurdling sound. A flung wad of mud missed Mallory's head and splattered against the picture. As if this were a signal, there was a sudden blinding melee of shrieks, thudding bodies, flung punches.

Mallory, shoving, swearing, dancing on his trampled feet, yanked the revolver from his waistband, pointed it in the air, and squeezed the trigger.

Nothing. An elbow caught him hard in the ribs.

He cocked the hammer with his thumb, squeezed again. The report was shocking, deafening.

In a split-second the melee was melting away from Mallory, men falling, billowing, scrambling away headlong on hands and knees in their utter beast-like eagerness to flee. Men were trampled before his eyes. Mallory stood for an instant, his jaw dropping in astonishment within his cambric mask, the gun still poised overhead.

Then a bolt of good sense struck him. He retreated. He tried to jam the pistol back into his waistband as he ran, but saw with shocked alarm that the hammer was cocked again, the gun ready to fire at any touch of the trigger. He dangled the treacherous thing at arm's-length as he fled.

At length he stopped, coughing bitterly. From behind him, wrapped in the roiling obscurity of fog, came scattered pistol-shots and bestial cries of rage, derision, glee.

Dear Christ, Mallory muttered, and peered at the mechanism. The devilish thing had cocked itself automatically, channeling part of the powder-blast into the piston beneath the barrel, which shunted the grooved cylinder back against a stationary ratchet, spinning the next round into place and kicking the hammer back. Mallory hooked both thumbs over the hammer and worked at the trigger with care, until he could close the mechanism. He slid the pistol back into his waistband.

He had not outrun the line of pasted handbills. They still ranged before him, apparently inexhaustible in number, slapped-up one after another in a ragged line. He followed them, through a street now seemingly empty. From somewhere came a distant crash of glass and whoops of boyish laughter.

SECRET KEYS made CHEAPLY, said a plastered bill. Handsome WATER-PROOFS for INDIA and the COLONIES. Apprentice CHYMISTS and DRUGGISTS Wanted.

Ahead he heard the quiet clop of slow hooves, the squeak of an axle. Emerging from the mist, then, the bill-sticker's van, a tall, black wagon, its towering sides mounted with great shouting billboards. A masked fellow in a loose grey raincoat was shoving a plastered bill against a wall. The wall was protected by a tall iron fence some five feet distant from the brick, but this bothered the sticker-man not at all, for he had a specialized roller-device on a kind of long broom-handle.

Mallory stepped nearer to watch. The bill-sticker did not look up, having reached a crucial moment of his work. The bill itself, which was tightly wrapped about a black rubber roller, was pressed and rolled, bottom-upward, against the wall; the sticker, at the same moment, deftly squeezing a hand-piston on the shaft of his device, which squirted out a gruelly mess of paste from twin spigots bracketed to the roller's ends. Another swipe downward to complete the pasting, and it was done.

The van moved on. Mallory stepped closer and examined the bill, which extolled, and depicted in an Engine-cut, the beautifying effects of Colgate's Clear Complexion Soap.

The sticker-man and his van moved on. Mallory followed it. The sticker-man noticed Mallory's attention, and it seemed to rattle him a bit, for he muttered something at the driver, and the van moved on a good ways.

Mallory followed discreetly. The van stopped now at a corner of Fleet Street, where the hoardings bore, by old tradition, the great shouting bills of the city's newspapers. But a bill was boldly slapped across the face of the Morning Clarion, and then another, and another.

More theatrical prints this time. DR. BENET of PARIS was to lecture on the Therapeutic Value of Aquatic Sleep; THE CHAUTAUQUA SOCIETY OF THE SUSQUEHANNA PHALANSTERY would present a symposium on The Social Philosophy of the Late Dr. Coleridge, and a Scientific Lecture with Kinotropy would be presented by DR. EDWARD MALLORY

Mallory halted, grinning behind his mask. EDWARD MALLORY! He had to admit that the name looked very well in eighty-point Engine-Gothic. It was a great pity that the speech could not come off, but clearly Huxley, or likely one of his staff-men, had placed the order for bills with promptness, and there had been no cancellation.

A shame, Mallory thought, gazing at the departing bill-van with a new proprietorial fondness. EDWARD MALLORY. He would have liked to keep the bill as a souvenir; and thought, indeed, of peeling it loose, but the gobbets of paste dissuaded him.

He looked more closely, hoping to commit the text to memory. At a second glance the printing-job was not all it might have been, for the black lettering had, here and there, smudgy rims of scarlet, as if the printing-pins had been soaked in red ink and not properly cleaned.

The Museum of Practical Geology, Jermyn Street, has the honor to present to the London Public, for two shows only, DR. EDWARD MALLORY. Dr. Mallory, F.R.S., F.R.G.S., will present the thrilling history of his discovery of the famous LAND LEVIATHAN in savage Wyoming; his theories of its milieu, habits, and sustenance; his encounters with the savage Cheyenne INDIANS; detailing with this the MELANCHOLY and HIDEOUS MURDER of his closest rival the late PROFESSOR RUDWICH; Secrets of Professional Gambling, specifically that of RATTING-DENS, to be imparted to those eager to know the TECHNIQUE OF ODDS-MAKING, to be followed by a most luscious DANCE OF THE 7 VEILS to be performed by the several Misses Mallory, giving a Frank Account of their Several Introductions to the ART of LOVE; only Gentlemen will be admitted; Price 2/6. Show to be accompanied by the advanced kinotropy of MR. KEETS.

Mallory gritted his teeth and broke into a sprint. He ran ahead of the van, which was moving on at foot-pace, and seized the bridle of the mule, two-handed. The animal stopped with a snort and a stumble. Its filthy head was swaddled in a canvas mask adapted from a feed-bag.

The coachman emitted a yelp from behind a smut-stained muffler. He leapt down from his wooden seat to land with a stagger, waving a hickory cudgel. Hullo! Leave off! he cried. Bar that nonsense, Davey, and hook it sharp His voice trailed off as he took Mallory's measure, slapping the cudgel against his callused palm with an attempt at menace.

The second bill-sticker rushed up from behind the van to join his friend, brandishing his long-handled rig like a pitchfork.

Hedge off, mister, the coachman suggested. We ain't doin' you no harm.

You most certainly are! Mallory bellowed. Where did you rascals obtain those bills? Tell me at once!

The taller man defiantly shook the paste-smeared roller of his rig at Mallory's face. London's wide-open today! You want to make a fight of where we dab our paper, then just you try us!

One of the large advert-boards on the side of the van swung open suddenly, on squealing brass hinges. A carriage-door, it seemed, for a small stout balding man hopped through it, from within the van. He wore a neat red shooting-coat, and checkered trousers tucked into patent-leather walking-boots. He was bare-headed, his round, red-cheeked face was not masked, and to Mallory's astonishment, he was smoking a large, vilely fuming pipe.

What's all this then? he inquired mildly.

A ruffian, sir! the coachman declared. Some villain bully-rock sent by Turkey-Legs!

What, all by hisself? the stout man said, with a quizzical arch of his brows. That don't seem right. He looked Mallory up and down. You know who I am, son?

No, Mallory said. Who are you?

I'm the gent they call the King of the Bill-Stickers, my boy! If you don't know that fact, you must be mighty green at this business!

I'm not in your business. I, sir, am Dr. Edward Mallory!

The stout man folded his arms, and rocked a bit on his boot-heels. So?

You just pasted-up a bill that grossly libeled me!

Oh, said the King. So that's your bellyache, is it? He grinned in evident relief. Well, that's nothing to do with me, Dr. Edward Mallory. I just paste 'em; I don't print 'em. I ain't liable.

Well, you're not putting up any more of those damnable libel-sheets! Mallory said. I want all the rest of them, and I demand to know where you obtained them!

The King quieted his two bristling henchmen with a regal move of his hand. I'm a very busy man, Dr. Mallory. If you'd care to step up in my van, and talk to me like a reasonable gentleman, then perhaps I'll listen, but I've no time for any bluster or threats. He fixed Mallory with a sharp squint of his little blue eyes.

Well, Mallory blurted, taken aback. Though he knew he was in the right, the King's quiet retort had taken the steam out of his indignation; he felt rather foolish of a sudden, and rather out of his element, somehow. Surely, he muttered. Very well.

Fair enough. Tom, Jemmy, let's back to work. The King clambered deftly into his van.

Mallory, after a moment's hesitation, followed him, heaving himself up into the body of the oddly made carnage. There were no seats inside; the flooring from wall to wall was dimpled and buttoned with thick maroon cushioning, like a Turkish ottoman. Slanted pigeon-holes of varnished wood lined the walls, stuffed with tightly rolled bills. A large trapdoor in the ceiling had been flung open, admitting a gloomy light. It stank direly of paste and cheap, black, shag tobacco.

The King sprawled at his ease, propping himself on a fat tufted pillow. The mule brayed under the driver's whip-crack, and the van lurched into sluggish squeaking motion. Gin and water? the King offered, opening a cabinet.

Plain water, if you please, Mallory said.

Straight water it is. The King poured from a pottery canteen into a tin mug. Mallory tugged his frayed mask down below his chin, and drank with an aching thirst.

The King gave Mallory a second round, and then a third. Perhaps a tasty squeeze o' lemon with that? The King winked. I do hope you know your limit.

Mallory cleared his slimy throat. Very decent of you. His face felt oddly naked without the mask, and this show of civility within the King's van, together with its chemical stink of glue, almost worse than the Thames, had quite dizzied him. I regret it if I, er, seemed a bit sharp earlier.

Well, it's the lads, you know, said the King, with generous tact. A cove must stand ready to handle his fists in the bill-sticking business. Just yesterday, my boys had to lay it on pretty brisk with old Turkey-Legs and his lads, over a matter of sticking-space within Trafalgar Square. The King sniffed in disdain.

I've had certain sharp troubles of my own during this emergency, Mallory said hoarsely. But basically. I'm a reasonable man, sir. Very rational—not the sort who looks for trouble; you mustn't think that.

The King nodded sagely. I've never yet known Turkey-Legs to hire any scholar as a bully-rock. By your dress and manner I take you to be a savant, sir.

You have a sharp eye.

I like to think so, the King allowed. So now that we have that matter clear, perhaps you'll informate me concerning this grievance you seem to hold.

Those bills you've pasted are forgeries, Mallory said. And libelous. They're certainly not legal.

As I explained before, that's none of my affair, the King said. Let me tell you a few facts of commerce, straight-out. For dabbing-up a hundred double-crown sheets, I expect to make one pound one shilling; which is to say tuppence and six-tenths of a penny per sheet; say three pence, rounded out. Now if you should care to purchase certain of my bills at that rate, I might be ready to talk business.

Where are they? Mallory said.

If you'd care to have a look among the cubbyholes for the items in question I will oblige you.

When the crew had stopped to paste more bills, Mallory began to sort through the stock. The bills were tightly wrapped in neat thick perforated scrolls, as dense and hefty as bludgeons.

The King passed a scroll through the trap-door to the driver. Then he peaceably tapped out the dottle of his meerschaum, refilled it from a twist of coarse paper, and lit it with a German tinder-box. He blew a cloud of foulness with every appearance of satisfaction.

Here they are, Mallory said. He peeled the outermost sheet from the roll and flapped it out within the van. Have a look at this abomination, will you? It looks quite splendid at first, but the text is obscenely outrageous!

Standard roll o' forty; that'll be six shillings even.

Read here, Mallory said, where it as much as accuses me of murder!

The King, politely, turned his eyes upon the sheet. His lips moved as he puzzled painfully over the title. Ma Lorry, he said at length. One of your lorry-shows, is it?

Mallory—that's my name!

It's a demi-sheet theatrical, no illos, the King said. Bit smudgy oh yes, I remember these. He sighed smoke. I might 'a known no good would come of taking this consignment. Mind you, the rascal paid in advance though.

Who? Whom?

Down in Limehouse, in the West India Docks, the King said. A deal of commotion in that locale, Dr. Mallory. Rascals slapping brand-new bills up all over every wall and hoarding in sight, since yesterday. My boys were inclined to make a bit of trouble over that encroachment, till Captain Swing—that's what he calls hisself—saw fit to engage our services.

Mallory's armpits prickled with sweat. Captain Swing, is it?

Sporting-fellow of some kind, to judge by his dress, the King said cheerfully. Short, red-headed, squinty—had a bump on his head, just here. Crazy as a bedbug, I should say. He was polite enough though, not proposing to make any trouble for the bill-sticking trade once customary matters was explained to him. And he had him a sight of ready money.

I know that man! Mallory said, his voice trembling. He's a violent Luddite conspirator. He may be the most dangerous man in England!

You don't say, the King grunted.

He's a dire threat to public safety!

Fellow didn't look like much, the King said. Funny little duck, wore spectacles and talked to hisself.

The man is an enemy of the realm—a dark-lanternist of the most sinister description!

I don't much hold with politics, meself, said the King, leaning back quite at his ease. The Bill-Sticking Regulatory Act—now that's politics for you, a doltish business! That blasted Act is mighty stiff, regarding where bills may be posted. Let me tell you, Dr. Mallory, I personally know the Member that got that Act passed in Parliament, for I was hired for his election campaign. He didn't mind where his bills went. It was all quite right-enough, so long as they was his bills!

My God! Mallory broke in. The thought of that evil man, loose in London—with money, from God only knows what source—fomenting riot and rebellion during a public emergency—and in control of an Engine-driven press! It's nightmarish! Horrible!

Pray don't fash yourself. Dr. Mallory, the King chided gently. My dear old father, rest his soul, used to tell me 'When all about you are losing their heads, son, just remember there are still twenty shillings in a pound.' 

That's as may be, Mallory said, but—

My dear dad stuck bills in the Time of Troubles! Back in the thirties, when the cavalry charged on the working-people, and old Hooky-Nose Wellington got hisself blown to flinders. Hard times indeed, sir, much harder than soft modern days with this trifling Stink! Call this an emergency? Why, I call it opportunity, and have done with it.

You don't seem to grasp the urgency of the crisis, Mallory said.

The Time of Troubles—now that was when they printed the first four-sheet double-crowns! The Tory Government used to pay my old dad—my dad was Beadle and Bill-Sticker to the parish of St. Andrews, Holborn—to black-wash Radical bills. He had to hire women to do it, there was so much call for the job. He'd black-wash Rad bills by day, and stick up new ones by night! There's a deal of fine opportunity in your times of revolution.

Mallory sighed.

My dad invented the device we call the Patent Extendable Dabbing-Joint—to which I myself have made a number of mechanical improvements. It serves to stick bills to the under-sides of bridges, for the water-trade. We are an entrepreneurial line in my family, sir. Not easily put out of countenance.

A lot of good all that will do you when London's reduced to ashes, Mallory said. Why, you're helping the scoundrel in his anarchistic plottings!

I should say you have that straight-backwards. Dr. Mallory, the King said, with an odd little chuckle. Last I saw, the fellow was paying his money into my pockets, and not vice-versa. Now that I think on it, he's consigned a number of bills to my safe-keeping—right along the top row, here. The King stood, yanked the documents down, cast them onto his padded floor. You see, sir, it don't really matter a hang what nonsense is blithered and babbled on these bills! The secret truth is, that bills is endless by their very nature, regular as the tides in the Thames, or the smoke of London. London's true sons call London 'The Smoke,' you know. She's an eternal city, like your Jerusalem, or Rome, or, some would say, Satan's Pandemonium! You don't see the King of the Bill-Stickers worrying for smoky London, do you? Not a bit of it!

But the people have fled!

A passing foolishness. They'll all be back, said the King, with sublime confidence. Why, they have no place else to go. This is the center of the world, sir.

Mallory fell silent.

So, sir, proclaimed the King, if you was to take my advice, you'd spend six shillings on that roll of bills you're clutching. Why, for one pound even, I'll toss in these other misprinted bills of our friend Captain Swing's. Twenty simple shillings, sir, and you may leave these streets, and rest at home in peace and quiet.

Some of these bills have already been posted, Mallory said.

I could have the lads black-wash 'em—or paste 'em over, anyhow, the King mused. If you was willing to make it worth their while, of course.

Would that put an end to the matter? said Mallory, reaching for his pocket-book. I doubt it.

A better end than any you can make with that pistol I see peeping from your trouser-band, said the King. That is an item which cannot do a gentleman and scholar any credit.

Mallory said nothing.

Heed my counsel, Dr. Mallory, and put that gun away before you do yourself a mischief. I do believe you might have hurt one of my lads, if I hadn't spied that gun through my peep-hole, and stepped out to set things right. Go home, sir, and cool your head.

Why aren't you at home, if you truly mean that advice? Mallory said.

Why, this is my home, sir, said the King. He tucked Mallory's money into his shooting-jacket. On pleasant days my old woman and I take our tea in here, and talk about old times and walls, and embankments, and hoardings 

I have no home in London; and in any case business calls me to Kensington, Mallory said.

That's a distance. Dr. Mallory.

Yes, it is, Mallory said, with a tug at his beard. But it strikes me that there are any number of museums and savants' palaces in Kensington, which have never been touched by advert-paper.

Really, mused the King. Do tell.


Mallory bade the King farewell a good mile from the Palace of Paleontology; he was unable to bear the fumes of glue any longer, and the van's lurching had made him badly seasick. He staggered off with the heavy scrolls of libelous and anarchic bills bundled awkwardly in his sweating grip. Behind him, Jemmy and Tom set to eager glue-slapping on the virgin bricks of the Palace of Political Economy.

Mallory propped the rolled bills against an ornate lamppost, and re-knotted his cloth mask over nose and mouth. His head spun evilly. Perhaps, he thought, that sticking-paste had had a bit of arsenic in it, or the ink some potent nauseous coal-derivative, for he felt poisoned, and weak in his very marrow. When he juggled up the bills again, their paper wrinkled in his sweating hands like the peeling skin of a drowned man.

He had, it seemed, frustrated a lashing bite of the tout's hydra-headed devilment. But this minor triumph seemed wretchedly small, when matched against the villain's seemingly endless reservoirs of wicked ingenuity. Mallory was stumbling in darkness—while torn at will by invisible fangs

And yet Mallory had discovered a crucial piece of evidence the tout was gone to earth in the West India Docks! To be so close to a chance to grapple with the scoundrel, and yet so far—it was enough to madden a man.

Mallory stumbled badly on a slick lump of horse-dung, then swung the scrolls up onto his right shoulder, in an unstable heap. It was a useless fantasy to imagine confronting the tout—alone, unaided, while the man was miles away, back across the chaos of London. Mallory had almost reached the Palace now, and it had taken well-nigh all he had to manage the trick of it.

He forced himself to concentrate on the matters at hand. He would haul the wretched bills to the Palace safety-box. They might prove useful as evidence someday, and they could take the place of Madeline's wedding-clock. He would take up the clock, he would find a way to flee this cursed London, and he would re-join his family, as he should have done. In green Sussex, in the bosom of the good auld clawney, there would be quiet, and sense, and safety. The gears of his life would begin to mesh once more in order.

Mallory lost his grip on the rolls of paper and they cascaded violently to the tarmac, one of them hitting him a smart blow across the shins as it bounded free. He gathered them up, groaning, and tried the other shoulder.

In the rancid mists down Knightsbridge a procession of some kind was moving steadily across the road. Ghost-like, blurred by distance and the Stink, they appeared to be military gurneys, the squat treaded monsters of the Crimean War. Fog muffled a heavy chugging and the faint repeated clank of jointed iron. One after another they passed, while Mallory peered forward, standing quite still and gripping his burden. Each gurney hauled a linked articulated caisson. These wains appeared to be canvas-shrouded cannon, with men, foot-soldiers in canvas-colored drab, clustered atop the cannons like barnacles, with a sea-urchin bristle of bayoneted rifles. At least a dozen war-gurneys, possible a score. Mallory rubbed his aching eyes in puzzled disbelief.

At Brompton Concourse he saw a trio of masked and batted figures scamper off with light-foot tread from a broken doorway; but no one offered trouble to him.

Some civil authority had erected saw-horses at the gate of the Palace of Paleontology. But the barricades were not manned; it was a simple matter to slip past them and up the fog-slick stone stairs to the main entrance. The Palace's great double-doors were thickly curtained in a protective shroud of wet canvas, hung from the brick archway down to the very flagstones. The thick damp fabric smelled sharply of chloride of lime. Behind the canvas, the Palace doors were slightly ajar. Mallory eased his way inside.

Servants were draping the furniture of lobby and drawing-room with thin white sheets of muslin. Others, a peculiar crowd of them, swept, and mopped, and dabbled earnestly at the cornices with long jointed feather-dusters. London women, and a large number of children of all ages, hustled about wearing borrowed Palace cleaning-aprons, looking anxious but vaguely exalted.

Mallory realized at length that these strangers must be the families of the Palace staff, come to seek shelter and security within the grandest public building known to them. And someone—Kelly the major-domo, presumably, with help from whatever savants still remained on the premises—had pluckily organized the refugees.

Mallory strode toward the lobby-desk, lugging his paper burden. These were sturdy working-class folk, he realized. Their stations might be humble, but they were Britons through and through. They were not daunted; they had rallied in instinctive defense of their scientific institutions and the civil values of law and property. He realized, with a heart-lifting wash of patriotic relief, that the lurching madness of Chaos had reached its limit. Within the faltering maelstrom, a nucleation of spontaneous order had arisen! Now, like a cloudy muck resolving into crystals, everything would change.

Mallory flung his hated burden behind the deserted counter of the lobby-desk. In one corner, a telegraph was clacking fitfully, new punch-tape spooling by fits and starts upon the floor. Mallory observed this small but significant miracle, and sighed, like a diver whose head has broken water.

The Palace air was sharp with disinfectant, but blissfully breathable. Mallory stripped the filthy mask from his face and stuffed it in his pocket. Somewhere in this blessed shelter, he thought, there was food to be had. Perhaps a wash-basin, and soap, and sulphurated powder for the fleas that had been creeping about his waistband since morning. Eggs. Ham. Restorative wine. Postage-stamps, laundresses, shoe-blacking—the whole miraculous concatenated network of Civilization.

A stranger came marching toward Mallory across the lobby floor a British soldier, an Artillery subaltern, in elegant dress-gear. He wore a double-breasted blue coatee, bright with chevrons, brass buttons, and gold-braided epaulets. His sleek trousers had a red military stripe. He wore a round, gold-laced forage-cap, and a buttoned pistol-holster at his neat white waistbelt. With his shoulders square, spine straight, and head high, this handsome young man approached with a stern look of purpose. Mallory straightened quickly, taken aback, even vaguely shamed, to compare his rumpled, sweat-stained civilian garb to this crisp military paragon.

Then, with a leap of surprise, happy recognition dawned. Brian! Mallory shouted. Brian, boy!

The soldier quickened his pace. Ned—why it is you, ain't it! said Mallory's brother, a tender smile parting his new Crimean beard. He seized Mallory's hand in both his own, and shook it heartily, with a solid strength.

Mallory noted with surprise and pleasure that military discipline and scientific diet had put inches and pounds on the lad. Brian Mallory, the family's sixth-born child, had often seemed a bit quiet and timid, but now Mallory's little brother stood a good six-four in his military boots, and had the look in his creased blue eyes of a man who had seen the world.

We've been a-waiting for you, Ned, Brian told him. His bold voice had slipped a bit, by some old habit, into the remembered tone of their childhood. For Mallory, it was a plaintive echo from deep memory the demands of a crowd of little children upon their eldest brother. Somehow, this familiar call, far from tiring or burdening Mallory, rallied him immediately into a mental second-wind. Confusion vanished like a mist and he felt stronger, more capable; the very presence of young Brian had recalled him to himself. Damme but it's good to see you! Mallory blurted.

It's good you're back at last, Brian said. We heard tale of a fire in your room—and you vanished into London, none knew where! That put me and Tom in a very mizmaze!

Tom is here too, eh?

We both come into London in Tom's little gurney,  Brian told him. His face fell. With dire news, Ned, and no ways to tell it, save to your face.

What is it? Mallory said, bracing himself. Is it is it Dad?

No, Ned. Dad's all right; or right as he ever is, these days. It is poor Madeline!

Mallory groaned. Not the bride-to-be. What is it now?

Well, it's to do with my mate, Jerry Rawlings, Brian muttered, squaring his epauletted shoulders with a look of embarrassed pain. Jerry wanted to do right by our Madeline, Ned, for he always talked of her, and lived very clean for her sake; but he's received such a letter at home, Ned, such a foul and dreadful thing! It quite knocked the heart out of him!

What letter, for God's sake?

Well, it warn't signed, 'cept 'One Who Knows'—but the writer knew so much about us, the family I mean, all our littlest doings, and said that Madeline had been unchaste. 'Cept in rougher words.

Mallory felt a surge of hot fury rush to his face. I understand, he said, in a quiet, choked voice. Go on.

Well, their engagement is broken, as you might guess. Poor Maddy has the vapors like she's never had them before. She liked to do herself an injury, and does nothing now but sit alone in the kitchen and cry rivers.

Mallory was silent, his mind grating over Brian's information.

I've been away a deal of time, in India, and Crimea, Brian said, in a low halting voice. I don't know how matters stand, exactly. Tell me true—you don't think there could be aught to what that wicked gossip told to Jerry? Do you?

What? Our own Madeline? My God, Brian, she's a Mallory girl! Mallory slammed his fist on the counter. No, it is slander; it's a foul deliberate attack on the honor of our family!

How why would anyone do such a thing to us, Ned? asked Brian, with a strange look of plaintive fury.

I know why it was done—and I know the villain who did it.

Brian's eyes went wide. You do?

Yes; he is the fellow who burnt my rooms. And I know where he is hiding, at this very moment!

Brian gazed at him in astonished silence.

I made an enemy of him, in a dark affair-of-state, Mallory said, measuring his words. I'm a man of some influence now, Brian; and I've uncovered the kind of secret, silent plottings that a man like yourself, an honest soldier of the Crown, could scarcely credit!

Brian shook his head slowly. I've seen pagan vileness done in India to make strong men sick, he said. But to see it done in England is more than I can bear! Brian tugged at his whiskers, a gesture Mallory found oddly familiar. I knew it was right to come to you, Ned. You always seem to see straight through things, the way none else can. Say on, then! What shall we do about this horrid business? What can we do?

That pistol in your holster—is it in working order?

Brian's eyes brightened. Truth to tell, 'tisn't regulation! A war trophy, gotten off a dead Tzarist officer He began to unlatch his holster-flap.

Mallory shook his head quickly, looking about the lobby. You're not afraid to use your pistol, if you have to do so?

Afraid? Brian said. If you warn't a civilian, Ned, I might take that question ill.

Mallory stared at him.

Brian met his eyes boldly. It's for the family, ain't it? That's what we fought the Russkies for—for the sake of the folks at home.

Where is Thomas?

He's eating in the—well, I'll show you.

Brian led the way into the Palace saloon. The scholarly precincts were crowded with babbling, raucous diners, working-folk mostly, forking up potatoes off the Palace china as if famished. Young Tom Mallory, dressed rather flash in a short linen coat and checked trousers, sat at table with a companion, over the remains of fried fish and lemonade.

The other man was Ebenezer Fraser.

Ned! cried Tom. I knew you'd come! He rose, and seized another chair. Sit down with us, sit down! Your friend Mr. Fraser here has been kind enough to buy us lunch.

And how are you. Dr. Mallory? Fraser inquired glumly.

A bit fatigued, Mallory told him, sitting, but nothing a bite of food and a huckle-buff wouldn't set to rights. How are you, Fraser? Quite recovered, I hope? He lowered his voice. And what line of clever nonsense have you been telling my poor brothers, pray?

Fraser said nothing.

Sergeant Fraser's a London policeman, Mallory said. Of the dark-lantern variety.

Truly? Tom blurted, alarmed.

A waiter worked his way toward the table, one of the regular staff, looking harried and apologetic. Dr. Mallory—the Palace larder's a bit low, sir. Simple fish-and-taters would be best, sir, if you don't mind it.

That will be fine. And if you could mix a huckle-buff—well, never mind. Bring me coffee. Strong and black.

Fraser watched the waiter leave, with melancholy patience. You must have had a lively night, Fraser remarked, when the man was out of ear-shot. Both Tom and Brian were watching Fraser with a new, half-resentful suspicion.

I have discovered that the tout—Captain Swing, that is—has gone to earth in the West India Docks, Mallory said. He's attempting to incite a general insurrection!

Fraser's lips tightened.

He has an Engine printing-press, and a rabble of confederates. He's printing seditious documents by the scores and hundreds. I confiscated a few specimens this morning—obscene, libelous, Luddite filth!

You've been industrious.

Mallory snorted. I'll shortly be a deal busier yet, Fraser. I mean to hunt the wretch down directly and put a sharp end to this!

Brian leaned forward. It was this 'Captain Swing' who wrote that lying slander against our Maddy, then, was it?

Yes.

Tom sat up straight in his chair, with a flush of excitement. West India Docks. Where's that, then?

Down on the Limehouse Reach, clear across London, Fraser said.

That don't matter a hang, Tom said quickly. I've my Zephyr!

Mallory was startled. You brought the Brotherhood's racer?

Tom shook his head. Not that old banger, Ned, but the latest model! She's a spanking-new little beauty, sitting in your Palace stables. Took us all the way from Sussex in a morning, and would have gone faster yet, if I hadn't had a coal-wain hitched to her. He laughed. We can go wherever we like!

Let's not lose our heads, gentlemen, Fraser warned.

They fell unwillingly silent for a moment, as the waiter deftly set Mallory's food before him. The sight of fried plaice and sliced potatoes made Mallory's stomach knot with a famished pang. We are free British subjects and may go as we please, Mallory said firmly, then seized his silverware and fell to at once.

I can only call that foolish, said Fraser. Riotous mobs are roaming the streets, and the man you seek is as cunning as an adder.

Mallory grunted derisively.

Fraser was dour. Dr. Mallory, it is my duty to see that you don't come to harm! We can't have you stirring up dangerous serpent's-nests in the vilest slums in London!

Mallory gulped hot coffee. You know that he means to destroy me, he told Fraser, locking eyes with him. If I don't finish him now, while I've the chance, he'll slowly peck me into pieces. There's not a dashed thing you can do that can protect me! This man is not like you and I, Fraser! He is beyond the pale! The stakes are life and death—it is him, or me! You know that is the truth.

Fraser, struck by Mallory's argument, looked shaken. Tom and Brian, even more alarmed at this new revelation of the depth of their troubles, glanced at one another in confusion, then turned to glare angrily at Fraser.

Fraser spoke reluctantly. Let's not act hastily! Once the fog lifts, and law and order have returned—

Captain Swing lives within a fog that never lifts, Mallory said.

Brian broke in, with a swipe of his gilded sleeve. I see no point in this, Mr. Fraser! You have deliberately deceived my brother Thomas and myself! I can put no credit in any of your counsel!

Brian's right! said Tom. He regarded Fraser with a mingled scorn and wonder. This man claimed he was a friend of yours, Ned, and got me and Brian to talking free-and-easy about you! Now he's a-trying to order us about! Tom shook his clenched fist, sinewy and work-hardened. I mean to teach this Captain Swing a sharp lesson! If I need to start with you, Mr. Fraser, then I stand a-ready!

Softly now, lads, Mallory told his brothers. Other diners nearby had begun to stare. Mallory deliberately wiped his mouth with a napkin. Fortune favors us, Mr. Fraser, he said quietly. I have acquired a pistol. And young Brian is also armed.

Oh, dear, said Fraser.

I'm not afraid of Swing, Mallory told him. Remember, I knocked him flat at the Derby. Face-to-face, he's nought but a yellow cur.

He is at the Docks, Mallory! Fraser said. D'ye think you're going to waltz and polka through a riot in the hardest part of London?

We Mallory lads aren't fancy-jacks from any dancing academy, Mallory told the policeman. D'ye think the London poor more frightful to face than Wyoming savages?

Actually, yes, Fraser said slowly. Considerably worse, I should judge.

Oh, for Heaven's sake, Fraser! Don't waste our time with this trifling! We must grapple once and for all with this slippery phantom, and a better chance will never come! In the name of sanity and justice, put an end to your useless, officious grizzling!

Fraser sighed. And suppose, in this brave expedition, that you are cunningly trapped and murdered, like your colleague Rudwick? What then? How would I answer to my superiors?

But now Brian fixed Fraser with a soldier's steely eye. Did you ever have a little sister, Mr. Fraser? Did you ever have to watch that girl's happiness shattered like a china cup, trampled by a monster? And with her broken heart, the honest heart of a Crimean hero, whose simple, manly intention was to make her his bride—

Fraser groaned aloud. Enough!

Brian leaned back, looking somewhat crestfallen at the interruption.

Fraser smoothed his dark lapels with both hands. It seems the fated time for risks, he admitted, with a lopsided shrug, and a passing wince. I haven't had a bit of luck since I met you. Dr. Mallory, and I daresay I'm due for a change of fortune. Suddenly, his eyes glittered. Who's to say that we might not bag the scoundrel, eh? Arrest him! He's clever, but four brave men might catch the nasty wretch with his guard down, whilst he swaggers about in poor stricken London like some Jacobin prince. Fraser scowled, his lean face twisting with genuine anger. It was an unexpectedly fearsome sight.

Fortune favors the brave, Brian said.

And God looks after fools, muttered Fraser. He leaned forward intently, plucking his trouser-legs from his bony knees. This is no light matter, gentlemen! No lark for amateurs. This is dire work! We shall be taking the law, and our lives, and our honor, into our own hands. If it is to be done at all, it must be done in the strictest and most permanent secrecy.

Mallory, sensing victory, spoke up with an adroitness that surprised even himself. My brothers and I respect your special expertise, Sergeant Fraser! If you will guide us toward justice, then we will gladly place ourselves at your command. You need never doubt our discretion or our resolve. The sacred honor of our own dear sister is at stake.

Tom and Brian seemed taken aback at this sudden change of tack, for they still distrusted Fraser, but Mallory's somber pledge brooked no objection from them. They followed his lead.

You'll never see me peaching! Tom declared. Not to my grave!

I should think the sworn word of a British soldier still accounts, Brian said.

Then we shall try the venture, Fraser said, with a wry look of fatalism.

I must get steam up in the Zephyr! Tom said, rising from his chair. Half-an-hour my little beauty takes, from a cold start.

Mallory nodded. He would put every minute to good use.


Outside the Palace, washed, combed, and intimately dusty with flea-powder. Mallory sought a lumpy purchase atop the Zephyr's wooden coal-wain. The chugging little gurney had barely room for two men within its line-streamed tin shell. Tom and Fraser had taken those seats. They were arguing now over a London street-map.

Brian stamped out a rude nest within the wain's flabby canvas, stretched atop a diminishing heap of coal. They take a deal of shoveling, your modern gurneys, Brian observed, with a stoic smile. He sat across from Mallory. Tom does take-on about this precious machine of his; talked my ear off about Zephyrs, all the way from Lewes.

The gurney and wain lurched into motion, the coal-wain's wooden-spoked rubbered wheels turning with a rhythmic creak. They rolled down Kensington Road with a startling celerity. Brian brushed a flaming smokestack spark from his dapper coat-sleeve.

You need a breathing-mask, Mallory said, offering his brother one of the makeshift masks the ladies had sewn within the Palace a neatly stitched ribboned square of gingham, stuffed with cheap Confederate cotton.

Brian sniffed at the rushing air. Ain't so bad.

Mallory knotted the ribbons of his own mask neatly behind his head. Miasma will tell against your health, lad, in the long run.

This don't compare to the pong of an Army transport boat, said Brian. The absence of Fraser seemed to have relaxed him. There was something more of the Sussex lad about him, and less of the stern young subaltern. Coaly fumes pouring out our engine-room, Brian reminisced, and the lads tossing-up their rations from the mal-de-mer, right and left! We steamed through that new Frenchy canal in Suez, straight from Bombay. We lived in that bloody transport for weeks! Rotten Egyptian heat—straight through to hard Crimean winter! If the cholery, or the quartan fever, didn't carry me off from that, then I needn't worry over any little mist in London. Brian chuckled.

I often thought of you, in Canada, Mallory told his brother. You, with a five-year enlistment—and a war on! But I knew you'd do the family proud, Brian. I knew you'd do your duty.

We Mallory lads are all over the world, Ned, said Brian, philosophically. His voice was gruff, but his bearded face had colored at Mallory's praise. Where's brother Michael right now, eh? Good old Mickey?

Hong Kong, I think, Mallory said. Mick would be here today with us surely, if luck had put his ship in port in England. He was never the sort to flinch from a proper fight, our Michael.

I've seen Ernestina and Agatha, since I was back, Brian said. And their dear little ones. He said nothing about Dorothy. The family did not talk about Dorothy anymore. Brian shifted on the lumpy canvas, turning a wary eye on the looming crenellations of a palace of savantry. Don't care much for a fight in the streets, he remarked. That was the only place the Russkies really stung us, in the streets of Odessa. Scrapping and sniping house-to-house in the city, like bandits. That's no civilized war. He frowned.

Why didn't they stand up straight, and give you an honest battle?

Brian glanced at him in surprise, then laughed, a bit oddly. Well, they surely tried that at first, at Alma and Inkermann. But we gave 'em such a hell of a toweling that it knocked 'em into a panic. You might call that partly my doing, I suppose. The Royal Artillery, Ned.

Do tell, Mallory said.

We're the most scientific of the forces. They love the Artillery, your military Rads. Brian snuffed another fat smokestack spark with a spit-dampened thumb. Special military savantry! Dreamy little fellers with specs on their noses, and figures in their heads. Never seen a sword drawn, or a bayonet. Don't need to see such things to win a modern war. 'Tis all trajectories, and fuse-timings.

Brian watched with alert suspicion as a pair of men in baggy raincoats sidled down the road. The Russkies did what they could. Huge redoubts, at the Redan, and Sevastopol. When our heavy guns opened up, they came apart like cracker-boxes. Then they fell back into trench-works, but the grapeshot from the mortar-organs worked like a marvel. Brian's eyes were distant now, focused on memory. You could see it, Ned, white smoke and dirt flying up at the head of the barrage-line, every round falling neat and true as the trees in an orchard! And when the shelling stopped, our infantry—French allies mostly, they did a deal of the footwork—would trot in over the palisades, and finish poor Ivan off with wind-up rifles.

The papers said the Russians fought with no respect for military decency.

They got mortal desperate when they found they couldn't touch us, Brian said. Took to partisan work, fighting from ambush, firing on white flags and such. Ugly business, dishonorable. We couldn't put up with that. Had to take measures.

At least it was all over swiftly, Mallory said. One doesn't like war, but it was time to teach Tsar Nicholas a lesson. I doubt the tyrant will ever tug the Lion's tail again.

Brian nodded. It's right astonishing, what those new incendiary shells can do. You can lay 'em down in a grid-work, neat as pie. His voice fell. You should have seen Odessa burning, Ned. Like a flaming hurricane, it was. A giant hurricane

Yes—I read about that, Mallory nodded. There was a 'storm-fire' in the siege of Philadelphia. Very similar business, very remarkable principle.

Ah, said Brian, that's the problem with the Yankees—no military sense! To think of doing that to your own cities! Why, you'd have to be a cack-handed fool!

They're a queer folk, the Yanks, Mallory said.

Well, some folk are too chuckleheaded to manage themselves, and that's a fact, Brian said. He glanced about warily as Tom piloted the Zephyr past the smoldering wreckage of an omnibus. Did you take to the Yankees, at all, in America?

Never saw Americans, just Indians. And the less said about that the better, thought Mallory. What did you think of India, by the way?

It's a dreadful place, India, Brian said readily, brim-full of queer marvels, but dreadful. There's only one folk in Asia with any sense, and that's the Japanese.

I heard you took part in an Indian campaign, Mallory said. But I never was quite sure who those 'Sepoys' were, exactly.

Sepoys are native troops. We had a rash of trouble with mutineers, Moslem nonsense, about pig-fat in their rifle-cartridges! It was sheer native foolishness, but Moslems don't care to eat pork, you know, all very superstitious. It looked dicey, but the Viceroy of India hadn't given the native regiments any modern artillery. One battery of Wolseley mortar-organs can send a Bengali regiment straight to hell in five minutes.

Brian's gold-braided shoulders glittered as he shrugged. Still, I saw barbarities at Meerut and Lucknow, during the rebellion You'd not think any man could do such vile, savage things. Especially our own native soldiers, that we ourselves had trained.

Fanatics, Mallory nodded. Your common Indian, though, must be surely grateful for a decent civil government. Railroads, telegraphs, aqueducts, and such.

Oh, said Brian, when you see some Hindu fakir a-sitting in a temple niche, filthy naked with a flower on his hair, who's to say what goes on in that queer headpiece of his? He fell silent, then pointed sharply over Mallory's shoulder. Over there—what are those rascals doing?

Mallory turned and looked. In the mouth of an adjoining street, the paving had been taken over by a large and thriving ring of gamblers. They're tossing dice, Mallory explained. A knot of shabby, disheveled men—scouts of some primitive kind, lawless pickets—were standing lookout under an awning, passing a bottle of gin. One fat ruffian gestured obscenely as the Zephyr chugged past, and his startled companions booted disbelieving taunts from behind their rag-masks.

Brian flung himself full-length across the coal-wain, and peered over the wooden wall. Are they armed?

Mallory blinked. I don't think they mean us any harm—

They're a-going to rush us, Brian announced. Mallory glanced at his brother in surprise, but to his greater astonishment he saw that Brian was quite right. The shabby men were capering after the Zephyr, almost skipping down the empty street, with a shake of their fists and a slosh of their gin-bottle. They seemed possessed with an angry yapping energy, like farm-dogs pursuing a carriage. Brian rose to one knee, untoggled his holster-flap, set his hand to the large queer pistol-butt within it—

He was almost flung from the wain as Thomas hit the Zephyr's throttle. Mallory grabbed his brother's belt and hauled him back to sprawling safety. The Zephyr racketed smoothly up the street, a small cascade of coal pattering out the back with the shock of acceleration. Behind them the pursuers stopped short in disbelief, then stooped like idiots to pick at the fallen coals, as if they were emeralds.

How did you know they would do that? Mallory asked.

Brian knocked coal-dust from his trouser-knees with a pocket-kerchief. I knew it.

But why?

 'Cause we're here, and they're there, I suppose! 'Cause we ride and they walk! He looked at Mallory red-faced, as if the question were more trouble to him than a gun-fight.

Mallory sat back, looking away. Take the mask, he said mildly, holding it out. I brought it just for you.

Brian smiled then, sheepish, and knotted the little thing about his neck.


There were soldiers with bayoneted rifles on the street-corners in Piccadilly, in modern speckled drab and slouch hats. They were eating porridge from mess-kits of stamped tin. Mallory waved cheerily at these minions of order, but they glared back at the Zephyr with such militant suspicion that he quickly stopped. Some blocks on, at the corner of Longacre and Drury Lane, the soldiers were actively bullying a small squad of bewildered London police. The coppers milled about like scolded children, feebly clutching their inadequate billy-clubs. Several had lost their helmets, and many bore rude bandages on hands and scalps and shins.

Tom stopped the Zephyr for coaling, while Fraser, followed by Mallory, sought intelligence from the London coppers. They were told that the situation south of the river was quite out of control. Pitched battles with brickbats and pistols were raging in Lambeth. Many streets were barricaded by pillaging mobs. Reports had it that the Bedlam Hospital had been thrown open, its unchained lunatics capering the streets in frenzy.

The police were sooty-faced, coughing, exhausted. Every able-bodied man in the force was on the streets, the Army had been called in by an emergency committee, and a general curfew declared. Volunteers of the respectable classes were being deputized in the West End, and equipped with batons and rifles. At least, Mallory thought, this litany of disaster crushed any further doubts about the propriety of their own venture. Fraser made no comment; but he returned to the Zephyr with a look of grim resolution.

Tom piloted on. Beyond authority's battered boundary, things grew swiftly more grim. It was noonday now, with a ghastly amber glow at the filthy zenith, and crowds were clustering like flies in the crossroads of the city. Clumps of masked Londoners shuffled along, curious, restless, hungry, or desperate—unhurried, and conspiring. The Zephyr, with merry toots of its whistle, passed through the amorphous crowd; they parted for it reflexively.

A pair of commandeered omnibuses patrolled Cheapside, crammed with hard-faced bruisers. Men waving pistols hung from the running-boards, and the roofs of both steamers were piled high and bristling with stolen furniture. Thomas easily skirted the wallowing 'buses, glass crunching beneath the Zephyr's wheels.

In Whitechapel there were dirty, shoeless children clambering like monkeys, four stories in the air, on the red-painted arm of a great construction-crane. Spies of a sort, Brian opined, for some were waving colored rags and screeching down at people in the street. Mallory thought it more likely that the urchins had clambered up there in hope of fresher air.

Four dead and bloating horses, a team of massive Percherons, lay swollen in Stepney. The stiffened carcasses, shot to death, were still in their harness. A few yards on, the dray itself appeared, sacked, its wheels missing. Its dozen great beer-casks had been rolled down the street, then battered open, each site of rapturous looting now surrounded by a pungent, fly-blown stickiness of spillage. There were no revelers left now, their only evidence being shattered pitchers, dirty rags of women's clothing, single shoes.

Mallory spotted a leprous plague of bills, slapped-up at the site of this drunken orgy. He hit the top of the Zephyr with a flung lump of coal, and Tom stopped.

Tom decamped from the gurney, Fraser following him, stretching cramps from his shoulders and favoring his wounded ribs. What is it?

Sedition, Mallory said.

The four of them, with a wary eye for interference, marched with interest to the wall, an ancient posting-surface of plastered timber, so thick with old bills that it seemed to be made of cheese-rind. Some two dozen of Captain Swing's best were freshly posted there, copies of the same gaudy, ill-printed broadside. The bill featured a large winged woman with her hair afire, surmounting two columns of dense text. Words, apparently at random, had been marked out in red. They stood silently, attempting to decipher the squirming, smudgy print. After a moment, young Thomas, with a shrug and a sneer, excused himself. I'll see to the gurney, he said.

Brian began to read aloud, haltingly.

 'AN APPEAL TO THE PEOPLE! Ye are all free Lords of Earth, and need only COURAGE to make triumphant WAR on the Whore of Babylondon and all her learned thieves. Blood! Blood! Vengeance! Vengeance, vengeance! Plagues, foul plagues, et cetera, to all those that harken not to universal justice! BROTHERS, SISTERS! Kneel no more before the vampyre capitalist and the idiot savantry! Let the slaves of crowned brigands grovel at the feet of Newton. WE shall destroy the Moloch Steam and shatter his rocking iron! Hang ten score tyrants from the lamp-posts of this city, and your happiness and liberty be guaranteed forever! Forward! Forward!!! We take hope in the human Deluge, we have no recourse but a general war! We crusade for the REDEMPTION, of the oppressed, of the rebels, of the poor, of the criminals, all those who are TORMENTED by the Seven-Cursed Whore whose body is brimstone and who rides the nightmare horse of iron ' 

There was much more. What in the name of heaven is the wretch trying to say? asked Mallory, his head buzzing.

I've never seen the like of this, murmured Fraser. It's the ranting of a criminal lunatic!

Brian pointed at the bottom of the bill. I cannot understand about these so-called 'Seven Curses'! He refers to them as if they were dreadful afflictions, and yet he never names and numbers them. He never makes them clear 

What can it be that he wants? Mallory demanded. He can't think that a general massacre is any answer to his grievances, whatever they may be 

There's no reasoning with this monster, Fraser said grimly. You were quite right, Dr. Mallory. Come what may—no matter what risk—we must be rid of him! There is no other way!

They returned to the Zephyr, where Tom had finished the coaling. Mallory glanced at his brothers. Above their masks, their reddened eyes shone with all the stern courage of manly resolution. Fraser had spoken for them all; they were united; there was no more need of words. In the very midst of this low squalor, it seemed to Mallory a moment of true splendor. Touched to the core, he felt his heart soar within him. For the first time in seeming ages, he felt redeemed, clean, utterly purposeful, utterly free of doubt.

As the Zephyr rolled on through Whitechapel, the exaltation began to fade, replaced with a heightened attention and a racing pulse. Mallory adjusted his mask, checked the workings of the Ballester-Molina, exchanged a few words with Brian. But with all doubt resolved, with life and death awaiting the coming roll of the die, there seemed little enough to say. Instead, like Brian, Mallory found himself inspecting every passing door and window with a nervous care.

It seemed that every wall in Limehouse was spattered with the wretch's outpourings. Some were vivid madness pure and simple many others, however, were cunningly disguised. Mallory noted five instances of the lecture-posters that had libeled him. Some might have been genuine, for he did not read the text. The sight of his own name struck his heightened sensibilities with a shock almost painful.

And he had not been the only victim of this queer kind of forgery. An advert for the Bank of England solicited deposits of pounds of flesh. A seeming offer of first-class railway excursions incited the public to rob the wealthy passengers. Such was the devilish mockery of these fraudulent bills that even quite normal adverts began to seem queer. As he scanned the bills, searching for double-meanings, every posted word seemed to decay into threatening nonsense. Mallory had never before realized the ubiquity of London's advertisements, the sullen omnipresence of insistent words and images.

An inexplicable weariness of soul struck him, as the Zephyr rumbled on unchallenged through the macadamed streets. It was a very weariness of London, of the city's sheer physicality, its nightmare endlessness, of streets, courts, crescents, terraces, and alleys, of fog-shrouded stone and soot-blackened brick. A nausea of awnings, a nastiness of casements, an ugliness of scaffoldings lashed together with rope; a horrible prevalence of iron street-lamps and granite bollards, of pawn-shops, haberdashers, and tobacconists. The city seemed to stretch about them like some pitiless abyss of geologic time.

An ugly shout split Mallory's reverie. Masked men had scuttled into the street before them, shabby, threatening, blocking the way. The Zephyr braked to a sudden stop, the coal-wain lurching.

Mallory saw at a glance that these were rascals of the roughest description. The first, an evil youngster with a face like dirty dough, in a greasy jacket and corduroy trousers, had a mangy fur cap pulled low, but not low enough to hide the prison-cut of his hair. The second, a sturdy brute of thirty-five, wore a tall grease-stiffened hat, checked trousers, and brass-toed lace-up boots. The third was thick-set and bowlegged, with leather knee-breeches and soiled stockings, a long muffler wrapped round and round his mouth.

And then, rushing from inside a plundered ironmonger's, two more confederates—hulking, idle, slouching young men, with short baggy shirt-sleeves and trousers too tight. They had armed themselves with spontaneous weapons—a goffering-iron, a yard-long salamander. Homely items these, but unexpectedly cruel and frightening in the ready hands of these bandits.

The brass-booted man, their leader, it seemed, tugged the kerchief from his face with a sneering yellow grin. Get out of that kerridge, he commanded. Get the hell out!

But Fraser was already in motion. He emerged, with quiet assurance, before the five jostling ruffians, for all the world like a school-teacher calming an unruly class. He announced, quite clearly and firmly Now that's no use, Mr. Tally Thompson! I know you—and I should think you know me. You are under arrest, for felony.

That be damned! blurted Tally Thompson, turning pale with astonishment.

It's Sergeant Fraser! shouted the dough-faced boy in horror, falling back two steps.

Fraser produced a pair of blued-iron handcuffs.

No! Thompson yelped, none o' that! I won't stand them! I won't bear none o' that!

You will clear the way here, the rest of you, Fraser announced. You, Bob Miles—what are you creeping round here for? Put away that silly ironware, before I take you in.

For Christ's sake. Tally, shoot him! shouted the mufflered ruffian.

Fraser deftly snapped his cuffs on Tally Thompson's wrists. So we have a gun, do we, Tally? he said, and yanked a derringer from the man's brass-studded belt. That's a shame, that is. He frowned at the others. Are you going to hook it, you lads?

Let's hook it, whined Bob Miles. We should hook it, like the sergeant says!

Kill him, you jolterheads! shouted the mufflered man, pressing his mask to his face with one hand, and pulling a short, broad-bladed knife with the other. He's a fucking copper, you idiots—do for him! Swing'll choke you if we don't! The mufflered man raised his voice. Coppers here! he screeched, like a man selling hot chestnuts. Everybody, come up and do for these copper sons-of-bitches—

Fraser lashed out deftly with the butt of the derringer, cracking it against the mufflered man's wrist; the wretch dropped his knife with a howl.

The three other ruffians took at once to their heels. Tally Thompson also tried to flee, but Fraser snagged the man's cuffed wrists left-handed, yanked him off-balance and spun him to his knees.

The man with the muffler hopped and hobbled back several paces, as if dragged against his will. Then he stopped, stooped over, picked up a heavy toppled flat-iron by its mahogany handle. He cocked his hand back, to throw.

Fraser leveled the derringer, and fired. The mufflered man doubled over, his knees buckling, and fell to the street, writhing in a fit. He's killed me, the ruffian squawked. I'm gut-shot, he's killed me!

Fraser gave Tally Thompson an admonitory cuff on the ear. This barker of yours is rubbish, Tally. I aimed for his bloody legs!

He didn't mean no harm, Tally sniveled.

He'd a five-pound flat-iron. Fraser glanced back at Mallory and Brian, where they stood astonished in the coal-wain. Come down, you lads—look sharp now. We'll have to leave your gurney. They'll be looking for it. We have to hoof it now.

Fraser yanked Tally Thompson to his feet, with a cruel jerk of the cuffs. And you. Tally, you'll lead us to Captain Swing.

I won't, Sergeant!

You will, Tally. Fraser hauled Tally forward, with a sharp beckoning glance back at Mallory.

The five of them picked their way around the squealing, choking ruffian, who rolled in his spreading blood on the pavement, his dirty bow-legs trembling in spasm. Damme if he don't take on, Fraser said coldly. Who is he. Tally?

Never knew his name.

Without breaking step, Fraser slapped Tally's battered top-hat from his head. The wrinkled topper seemed glued to the ruffian's scalp with grime and macassar-oil. Of course you know him!

No name! Tally insisted, looking back at his lost hat with a leer of despair. A Yankee, inne?

What sort of Yankee, then? asked Fraser, scenting deceit. Confederate? Unionist? Texian? Californian?

 'E's from New York, Tally said.

What, Fraser said in disbelief, you'd tell me he was a Manhattan Communard! He glanced back once at the dying man as they walked on, then recovered himself swiftly and spoke with tepid skepticism. He didn't talk like any New York Yankee.

I don't know nothing 'bout any commoners. Swing liked 'im, is all!

Fraser led them down an alleyway crossed with rusty elevated cat-walks, its towering brick walls glistening with greasy damp. Are there more like that one, in Swing's counsel? More men from Manhattan?

Swing's got a deal of friends, Tally said, seeming to recover himself, and he'll do for you, he will, you trifle wi' him!

Tom, said Fraser, turning his attention to Mallory's brother, can you handle a pistol?

A pistol?

Take this one, said Fraser, handing over Tally's derringer. There's but one shot left. You musn't use it lest your man is close enough to touch.

Having rid himself of the derringer, Fraser then reached, without pause, into his coat-pocket, pulled out a small leather blackjack, and commenced, while still walking steadily, to batter Tally Thompson, with numbing accuracy, on the thick meat of his arms and shoulders.

The man flinched and grunted under the blows, and finally began to howl, his flat nose running snot.

Fraser stopped, pocketed his truncheon. Damn ye for a fool, Tally Thompson, he said, with a queer kind of affection. Know you nothing of coppers? I've come for your precious Swing all by meself, and brought these three jolly lads just to see the fun! Now where's he lurking?

A big warehouse in the docks, Tally sniveled. Full of loot—wonders! And guns, whole cases of fancy barkers—

Which warehouse, then?

I dunno, Tally wailed, I never been inside the bloody gates before! I don't know the bloody names of all them fancy go-downs!

What's the name on the door? The owner!

I can't read, Sergeant, you know that!

Where is it, then? Fraser asked relentlessly. Import docks or export?

Import 

South side? North side?

South, about middle-ways From the street behind them came distant shouts, a frenzied shattering of glass, and drum-like echoed booms of battered sheet-metal. Tally fell silent, his head cocked to listen. His lips quirked. Why, that's your kerridge! he said, the whine gone from his voice. Swing's lads a-come back hotfoot, and found yer kerridge, Sergeant!

How many men in this warehouse?

Listen to 'em breaking 'er up! said Tally. A queer variety of child-like wonder had chased all fear from his sullen features.

How many men? Fraser barked, boxing Tally's ear.

They're knocking 'er to smithers! Tally declared cheerily, shrugging from the blow. Ludd's work on your pretty gurney!

Shut yer trap, ye bastard! young Tom burst out, his voice high with rage and pain.

Startled, Tally regarded Tom's masked face with a dawning leer of satisfaction. What's that, young mister?

Shut up, I told ye! Tom cried.

Tally Thompson leered like an ape. It ain't me hurting your precious gurney! Yell at them, boy! Tell 'em to stop, then! Tally lurched backward suddenly, snatching his manacled hands from Fraser's grip. The policeman staggered, almost knocking Brian from his feet.

Tally turned and screeched through his cupped hands. Stop that fun, my hearties! His howl echoed down the brick-work canyon. Ye're hurtin' private property!

Tom pounced on the man like lightning, with a wild spinning swing of his fist. Tally's head snapped back, and the breath left him in a ragged gasp. He tottered a step, then dropped to the cobbled floor of the alley like a sack of meal.

There was a sudden silence.

Damme, Tom! said Brian. Ye knocked his lights out!

Fraser, his truncheon drawn now, stepped across the supine ruffian, and peeled one eyelid back with his thumb. Then he glanced up at Tom, mildly. You've a temper, lad 

Tom tugged his mask free, breathing shakily. I could have shot him! he blurted, his voice thin. He looked to Mallory, with a strange confused appeal. I could ha', Ned! Shot him down dead!

Mallory nodded shortly. Easy, lad

Fraser fumbled to unlock the handcuffs; they were slick with blood from Tally's lacerated wrists.

That was mortal strange, what the rascal just did! Brian marveled, in a hushed Sussex drawl. Are they bedlam crazy here, Ned? Have they all gone ellynge, these London folk?

Mallory nodded soberly. Then he raised his voice. But nowt that a good right arm don't cure! He whacked Tom's shoulder with an open palm. Ye're a boxer. Tommy lad! Ye blowed him down like a slaughtered ox!

Brian snorted laughter. Tom smiled shyly, rubbing his knuckles.

Fraser rose, pocketing truncheon and cuffs, and set off up the alley, at a half-trot. The brothers followed him. It warn't so much, Tom said, his voice giddy.

What, Mallory objected, a mere lad of nineteen, layin' out that brassy-boots brawler? It's a marvel surely!

It warn't any fair fight, with his hands bound, Tom said.

One punch! Brian gloated. Ye stretched him flat as an oaken plank. Tommy!

Stow it! Fraser hissed.

They fell silent. The alley ended by the vacant ground of a demolished building, its cracked foundation strewn with bits of red brick and greying spars of splintered lumber. Fraser picked his way forward. The sky rolled yellow-grey overhead, the haze breaking here and there to reveal thick greenish clouds like rotting curd.

Hell's bells, Tom declared, in a tone of thin jollity. They can't a-heard us talking, Mr. Fraser! Not with that almighty rucket they were making on my gurney!

It isn't that lot worries me now, lad, Fraser said, not unkindly. But we might meet more pickets.

Where are we? Brian asked, then stumbled to a halt. God in heaven! What is that smell?

The Thames, Fraser told him.

A thick wall of low brick stood at the end of the vacant plot. Mallory hoisted himself up and stood, breathing very shallowly, his mask pressed hard to his bearded lips. The far side of the brick wall—it was part of the Thames embankment—sloped down ten feet to the river-bed. The tide was out, and the shrunken Thames was a sluggish gleam between long plazas of cracked muddy shore.

Across the river stood the steel navigation-tower of Cuckold's Point, adorned with nautical warning-flags. Mallory could not recognize the signals. Quarantine, perhaps? Blockade? The river seemed nigh deserted.

Fraser looked up and down the mud-flats at the foot of the embankment. Mallory followed his gaze. Small boats were embedded in the grey-black mud as if set in cement. Here and there along the bend of the Limehouse Reach, rivulets of viridian slime reached up through the gouged tracks of channel-dredgers.

Something like a river-breeze—not a breeze at all, but a soft liquid ooze of gelatinous Stink—rose from the Thames and spilled over them where they stood. Dear God! Brian cried in weak amazement, and knelt quickly behind the wall. With a sympathetic ripple of queasiness. Mallory heard his brother retch violently.

With a stern effort, Mallory mastered the sensation. It was not easy. Clearly, the raw Thames surpassed even the fabled stench in the holds of Royal Artillery transports.

Young Thomas, though he'd also gone quite pale, seemed of tougher stuff than Brian—inured, perhaps, by the chugging exhaust of steam-gurneys. Why, look at this nasty business! Tom suddenly declared, in a muffled, dreamy voice. I knew we'd a drought upon the land, but I never dreamt of this! He looked to Mallory with astonished, reddened eyes. Why, Ned—the air, the water—there's never been such a dreadfulness, surely!

Fraser seemed pained. London's never what she might be, in summer 

But look at the river! Tom cried innocently. And look, look, yonder comes a ship! A large paddle-steamer was working her way up the Thames, and a very queer-looking craft she was indeed, with her hull flat as a raft's, and a cheese-box cabin of sloping, riveted iron, the walls of black armor patched bow-to-stern with large white squares cannon-hatches. On her bow, two sailors, in rubber gloves and nozzled rubber helmets, took soundings with a leaded line.

What sort of vessel is that? asked Mallory, wiping his eyes.

Brian rose unsteadily, leaned across the wall, wiped his mouth, and spat. Pocket ironclad, he announced hoarsely. A river gun-ship. He pinched his nose shut and shuddered from head to foot.

Mallory had read of such craft, but had never seen one. From the Mississippi campaign, in America. He stared beneath a shading hand, wishing for a spyglass. Does she fly Confederate colors, then? I didn't know we'd any of her class here in England No, I see she flies the Union Jack!

See what her paddle-wheels do! Tom marveled. That river-water must be thick as neat's-foot jelly 

No one saw fit to remark on this observation. Fraser pointed downstream. Listen, lads. Some rods away lies a deep-dredged channel. It leads into the moorings for the West India Docks. With the river this low, with luck, a man might creep through that channel, to emerge within the docks unseen.

Walk o' er the mud o' the shore, you mean to say, Mallory said.

No! Brian cried. There must be another stratagem!

Fraser shook his head. I know those docks. They've an eight-foot wall about 'em, topped by a very sharp cheval-de-frise. There are loading-gates, and a rail-head, too, but they'll be close-guarded sure. Swing chose well. The place is nigh a fortress.

Brian shook his head. Won't Swing guard the river, too?

Doubtless, Fraser said, but how many men will stand sharp lockout over this stinking mud, for Swing or anyone else?

Mallory nodded, convinced. He's right, lads.

But it'll daub us neck to foot with smeechy filth! Brian protested.

We're not made o' sugar, Mallory grunted.

But my uniform, Ned! D'ye know what this dress-coatee cost me?

I'll swap ye my gurney for that shiny gold braid, Tom told him.

Brian stared at his younger brother, and winced.

Then we must strip for it, lads, Mallory commanded, shrugging out of his jacket. Like we were farm-hands, a-pitching sweet hay on a nice Sussex morn. Hide that city finery in the rubble, and be quick about it.

Mallory stripped to the waist, tucked his pistol in the belt of his rolled-up trousers, and lowered himself down the embankment wall. He half-slid, half-hopped to the evil mud below.

The river-bank was as hard and dry as brick. Mallory laughed aloud. The others joined him, Brian coming last. Brian kicked a cracked dinner-plate of mud with his waxed and polished boot. Damme for a fool, he said, to let you talk me out of uniform!

Pity! Tom taunted. Yell never launder the sawdust out o' that fancy forage-cap.

Fraser, removing his collar now, was in white shirt and braces—surprisingly dandyish items, of watered scarlet silk. A new shoulder-holster of pale chamois held a stout little pepperbox pistol. Mallory noted the bulge of a neat padded bandage beneath the shirt and strap. Don't go griping, lads, Fraser said, leading the way. Some folk pass their very lives in the mud of the Thames.

Who's that then? asked Tom.

Mudlarks, Fraser told him, picking his way. Winter and summer, they slog up to their middles, in the mud o' low tide. Hunting lumps o' coal, rusty nails, any river-rubbish that will fetch a penny.

Are you joking? Tom asked.

Children mostly, Fraser persisted calmly, and a deal of feeble old women.

I don't believe you, Brian said. If you told me Bombay or Calcutta, I might grant it. But not London!

I didn't say the wretches were British, Fraser said. Your mudlarks are foreigners, mostly. Poor refugees.

Well, then, Tom said, relieved.

They tramped on silently, breathing as best they could. Mallory's nose had clogged solid and his throat was thick with phlegm. It was a relief of sorts, to be spared the sense of smell.

Brian was still muttering, a monotone to match their tramping step. Britain's a sight too hospitable to all these damn foreign refugees. If I'd my way, I'd transport the lot to Texas 

All the fish here must be dead, eh? said Tom, stooping to rip up a china-hard platter of mud. He showed Mallory a mash of flattened fish-bones embedded in it. Look, Ned—the very image of your fossils!

They reached an obstacle a few yards on, a dredger's muddy hollow, half-filled with black silt, marbled with veins of vile pale grease like the lees from a pan of bacon. There was no help for it but to leap and dodge and splash across the ditch, and Brian had the evil luck to miss his footing. He came up foully smeared, flicking muck from his hands and cursing wildly in what Mallory took to be Hindustani.

Beyond the ditch, the crust grew treacherous, plates of dried mud skidding or crumbling underfoot, over a pitchy, viscous muck full of ooze and bubbling gas-pockets. But there was worse luck yet at the entrance-channel to the Docks. Here the channel's banks were close-packed tarred pilings, slick with greenish fur and oily damp, rising fifteen feet above the water-line. And the water itself, which filled the broad channel from bank to bank, was a chilly grey sump, seemingly bottomless, writhing with leg-thick wads of viridian slime.

It was an impasse. Now what's our course? asked Mallory grimly. Swim?

Never! Brian shouted, his eyes reddened and wild.

Scale the walls, then?

We can't, Tom groaned, with a hopeless look at the slimy pilings. We can scarcely breathe!

I wouldn't wash my hands in that damn water! Brian cried. And my hands are caked in stinking muck!

Stow it! Fraser said. Swing's men will hear you sure. If they catch us down here, we'll be shot like dogs! Stow it, and let me think!

My God, the Stink! Brian cried, ignoring him. He seemed near panic. It's worse than a transport—worse than a Russki trench! Christ Jesus, I saw 'em bury week-old pieces of Russki at Inkermann, and that smelled better than this!

Knife it! Fraser whispered. I hear something.

Footsteps. The tramp of a group of men, coming nearer. They've got us, Fraser said in sharp desperation, gazing up the sheer wall and putting a hand to his pistol. Our number's up—sell your lives dear, lads!

But in one moment—a series of instants shaved so thin as to be normally useless to the human mind—inspiration blew through Mallory like a gust of Alpine wind.

Don't, he commanded the others, in a voice of iron conviction. Don't look up. Do as I do!

Mallory began to sing a chantey, loudly, drunkenly.

		 'At Santiago love is kind,
		And we'll forget those left behind—
		So kiss us long, and kiss us well,
		Polly and Meg and Kate and Nell—' 

C'mon, you lads! he urged cheerily, with a boozy wave of his arm. Tom and Brian, direly puzzled, chimed in the chorus, faltering and belated.

		 'Farewell, farewell, you jolly young girls,
		We're off to Rio Bay!'

Next verse! Mallory crowed.

		 'At Vera Cruz the days are fine,
		Farewell to Jane and Caroline' 

Ahoy! came a brusque shout from the top of the wall. Mallory glanced up, in feigned surprise, to see foreshortened bodies. Half-a-dozen marauders were looming over them, rifles slung over their backs. The speaker crouched at the top of the pilings, his head and face swathed in kerchiefs of knotted silk paisley. He held a gleaming, long-barreled pistol, with seeming carelessness, across his knee. His trousers, of white duck, looked immaculate.

Ahoy the shore! Mallory shouted, craning his neck. He flung his arms wide in jovial greeting, and almost toppled backward. How might we be o' service to you flash gentlemen?

Here's a conundrum! the leader announced, in the elaborate tone of a man casting pearls of wit before swine. Just how very lushed, how utterly well-pissed indeed, can four London pigeons be? He raised his voice. Can't you smell that dreadful stench down there?

Surely! Mallory said. But we want to see the India Docks!

Why? The word was cold.

Mallory laughed harshly. Because it's full of things we want, ain't it? Stands to reason, don't it?

Things like clean linen? said one of the other men. There was laughter, mixed with grunts and coughing.

Mallory laughed too, and slapped his naked chest. Why not! Can you lads help us? Throw us down a rope or the like!

The leader's eyes narrowed between his paisley wraps, and he tightened his grip on the pistol-butt. You're no sailor! A jack-tar never says 'rope.' Rather, he always says line'!

What's it to you, what I am? Mallory shouted, scowling up at the man. Throw us a rope! Or a ladder! Or a bleeding balloon! Or else go to hell!

Jolly right! Tom chimed in, his voice shaking. Who needs you lot, anyway!

The leader turned, his men vanishing with him. Hurry up! Mallory bellowed, as a parting shot. You can't keep all that fancy swag to yourselves, you know!

Brian shook his head. Jesus, Ned, he whispered. This is a damn tight pinch!

We'll pass as looters, Mallory said quietly. We'll pose as drunken rascals, primed for any kind of mischief! We'll join their ranks, and make our way to Swing!

What if they ask us questions, Ned?

Act stupid.

Halloo! came a shrill voice from above.

What's that? Mallory cried roughly, looking up. It was a masked and scrawny boy of fifteen years or so, balanced atop the pilings with a rifle in his hands.

Lord Byron's dead! the boy yelled.

Mallory was dumbstruck.

Tom shrilled out in the silence. Who says he is?

It's true! Old bastard's kicked the bucket, he's dead as mutton! The boy laughed in giddy delight, and capered along the edge of the pilings with his rifle waggling over his head. He vanished with a leap.

Mallory found his voice. Surely not.

No, Fraser agreed.

Not likely, anyway.

Wishful thinking on the part of these anarchists, Fraser suggested.

There was a long, empty silence.

Of course, Mallory said, tugging his beard, if the Great Orator truly is dead, then that means Words failed him in a foundering rush of confusion, but the others watched Mallory for guidance, silent and expectant. Well, Mallory said, the death of Byron would mark the end of an age of greatness!

It needn't mean much at all, Fraser objected, his voice under firm control. There are many men of great talent in the Party. Charles Babbage yet lives! Lord Colgate, Lord Brunel the Prince Consort for instance. Prince Albert is a sound and thoughtful man.

Lord Byron can't be dead! Brian burst out. We're standing in stinking mud, believing a stinking lie!

Quiet! Mallory commanded. We'll simply have to suspend any judgment on this matter until we have firm evidence!

Ned's right, nodded Tom. The Prime Minister would have wanted it that way! That's the scientific method. That was what Lord Byron always taught us 

A thick, tarred rope, its end knotted in a fat noose, came snaking down the wall. The anarchist lieutenant—the dainty man with the paisley kerchiefs—posed one bent leg atop the wall, with his elbow on his knee and his chin in his hand. Put your arse in that, my friend, he suggested, and we'll hoist you up in a trice!

I thank you kindly! Mallory said. He waved with cheery confidence and stepped into the noose.

When the tug came, he braced his mud-caked shoes against the slick and nasty timbers, and stamped his way up, and over the top.

The leader tossed the emptied noose back down, with a kid-gloved hand. Welcome, sir, to the august company of the vanguard of mankind. Permit me, under the circumstances, to introduce myself. I am the Marquess of Hastings. The self-styled Marquess bowed slightly, then struck a pose, chin cocked, one gloved fist poised on his hip.

Mallory saw that the fellow was in earnest.

The title of Marquess was a relic from the years before the Rads, yet here was a young pretender of some sort, a living fossil, alive and in command of this vipers' crew! Mallory could scarcely have been more startled to see a young plesiosaur lift its snaky head from the depths of the stinking Thames.

Lads, drawled the young Marquess, pour some of that Cologne over our pungent friend! If he does anything stupid, you know what to do.

Shoot him? someone blurted, idiotically.

The Marquess winced elaborately—an actor's gesture indicating a breach of taste. A boy in a stolen copper's helmet and a ripped silk shirt slopped chill Cologne from a cut-glass bottle over Mallory's bare neck and back.

Brian rose next, at the end of the rope. Those are soldier's trousers, under that muck, the Marquess observed. Absent without leave, comrade?

Brian shrugged mutely.

Enjoying your little holiday in London? Brian nodded like a fool.

Give this filthy personage new trousers, the Marquess commanded. He looked about his little troupe of six, who were once again lowering the line with the clumsy enthusiasm of a May Day tug-o'-war. Comrade Shillibeer! You're about this man's size—give him your trousers.

Aw, but Comrade Markiss—

To each according to his needs. Comrade Shillibeer! Doff the garment at once.

Shillibeer climbed clumsily out of his trousers and proffered them up. He wore no undergarments, and he tugged nervously at his shirt-tails with one hand.

For heaven's sake, the Marquess said quizzically, must I tell you sheepish dullards every little thing? He pointed sharply to Mallory. You! Take Shillibeer's place and haul that line. You, soldier—no longer the oppressor's minion, but a man entirely free!—put on Shillibeer's trousers. Comrade Shillibeer, quit that wriggling. You have nothing of which to be ashamed. You may go at once to the general depot for fresh garments.

Thank you, sir!

 'Comrade,'  the Marquess corrected. Get something nice, Shillibeer. And bring more Cologne.

Tom came up next. Mallory helping with the heaving. The bandits were badly hampered by their clattering, poorly slung rifles. These were general-issue Victoria carbines, heavy single-shot relics now consigned to native troops in the Colonies. The rioters were rendered yet more clumsy by fearsome kitchen-knives and home-made truncheons, stuffed at random into their looted finery. They wore gaudy scarves, sweaty silks, Army bandoliers, and more resembled Turkish bashi-bazouks than any kind of Briton. Two of them were scarcely more than boys, while another pair were thick-set, lumpish, thievish rascals, sodden with drink. The last, to Mallory's continued surprise, was a slender, silent man, in the quiet dress of a gentleman's valet.

The Marquess of Hastings examined Tom. What is your name?

Tom, sir.

The Marquess pointed. What's his name?

Ned.

And him?

Brian, Tom said. I think

And what, pray, is the name of that grim-looking cove below, looking so awfully much like a copper?

Tom hesitated.

Don't you know?

He never gave us any proper name, Mallory broke in. We just call him the Reverend.

The Marquess glared at Mallory.

We only met the Reverend today, sir, Tom apologized glibly. We ain't what you'd call bosom pals.

Suppose we leave him down there, then, the Marquess suggested.

Haul him up, Mallory countered. He's clever.

Oh? And what of you, Comrade Ned? You're not half so stupid as you pretend, it seems. And you're not very drunk.

Then give me a drink, Mallory said boldly. And I could do with one of them carbines too, if you're divvying loot.

The Marquess took note of Mallory's pistol, then cocked his masked head and winked, as if they were sharing a joke.

All things in time, my eager friend, he said. He waved his neat gloved hand. Very well. Haul him.

Fraser rose within the noose. So, 'Reverend,'  said the Marquess, what, pray, might be your denomination?

Fraser shook the rope loose and stepped out. What do you think, guv'nor? I'm a bleedin' Quaker!

There was evil laughter. Fraser, pretending a loutish pleasure at the others' fun, shook his gingham-masked head. No, he rasped, no Quaker I, for I'm a Panty-sucker!

The laughter stopped short.

Panty-sucker, Fraser insisted, one o' them yellow-back Yankee ranters—

The Marquess broke in with chill precision. A Pantisocrat, do you mean? That is to say, a lay preacher of the Susquehanna Phalanstery?

Fraser stared dumbly at the Marquess.

I refer to the Utopian doctrines of Professor Coleridge and Reverend Wordsworth, the Marquess persisted, with gentle menace.

Right, Fraser grunted, one o' them.

That seems to be a copper's sling and pistol that you carry, my pacifistic Pantisocrat friend.

Got it from a copper, didn't I? He paused. A dead'un!

There was laughter again, broken with coughs and grunts.

The boy standing next to Mallory elbowed one of the older louts. This Stink's turning me head, Henry! Can't we hook it?

Ask the Marquess, Henry said.

You ask 'im, the boy wheedled, he always makes such fun o' me 

Harken, now! said the Marquess. Jupiter and I shall escort the new recruits to the general depot. The rest of you shall continue shore patrol.

The remaining four groaned in dissent.

Don't deviate, the Marquess chided, you know that all the comrades get a turn at river-duty, same as you.

The Marquess, followed closely by the man, Jupiter, led the way along the embankment. It astonished Mallory that the fellow would turn his back on four armed strangers, an act of either arrant foolishness or sublimely careless bravery.

Mallory traded silent glances, full of meaning, with Tom, Brian, and Fraser. All four still bore their weapons, the anarchists having not even troubled to confiscate them. It would be the work of moments to shoot their guide in the back, and perhaps the man too, though the black was unarmed. A vile business, though, striking from behind, though perhaps a necessity of war. But the others were shifting itchily as they walked, and Mallory realized that they looked to him to do the deed. This venture had become his, now, and even Fraser had bet his life on the fortunes of Edward Mallory.

Mallory edged forward, matching his stride with that of the Marquess of Hastings. What's in this depot of yours, Your Lordship? A deal of fine loot, I should hope.

A deal of fine hope, my looting friend! But never you mind that. Tell me this. Comrade Ned—what would you do with loot, if you had it?

I suppose that might depend on what it was, Mallory ventured.

You'd carry it back to your rat-warren, the Marquess surmised, and sell it for a fraction of its worth to a fencing-Jew, and spend the lot of that on drink, to wake, in a day or two, in a filthy station-house, with a copper's foot on your neck.

Mallory stroked his chin. What would you do with it, then?

Put it to use, of course! We shall use it in the cause of those who gave it value. By that, I mean the common-folk of London, the masses, the oppressed, the sweated labor, those who produce all the riches of this city.

That's a queer sort of talk, Mallory said.

The revolution does not loot, Comrade Ned. We sequester, we commandeer, we liberate! You and your friends were drawn here by a few imported gewgaws. You think to carry off what your hands can clutch in a few moments. Are you men, or magpies? Why settle for a pocketful of dirty shillings? You could own London, the modern Babylon herself! You could own futurity!

 'Futurity,' eh? said Mallory, glancing back at Fraser. Above his gingham mask the policeman's eyes showed unmitigated loathing.

Mallory shrugged. How much tin will a quart of 'futurity' fetch, Yer Lordship?

I'll thank you not to call me that, the Marquess said sharply. You address a veteran of popular revolution, a people's soldier who takes pride in the simple title of 'comrade.' 

Begging your pardon, I'm sure.

You're not a fool, Ned. You can't mistake me for a Rad Lord. I'm no bourgeois meritocrat! I am a revolutionary, and a mortal enemy by blood and conviction of the Byron tyranny and all its works!

Mallory coughed harshly, cleared his throat. All right then, he said in a new and sharper voice. What's all this talk about? Seizing London—you can't be serious! That hasn't been done since William the Conqueror.

Read your history, friend! the Marquess retorted. Wat Tyler did it. Cromwell did it. Byron himself did it! He laughed. The People Risen have seized New York City! The working-people rule Manhattan as we walk and speak here! They have liquidated the rich. They have burned Trinity! They have seized the means of information and production. If mere Yankees can do that, then the people of England, far more advanced along the course of historical development, can do it with even greater ease.

It was clear to Mallory that the man—the lad, rather, for beneath that mask and swagger he was very young—believed this evil madness with a whole heart. But the Government, Mallory protested, will send in the Army.

Kill their officer-class, and the Army rank-and-file will rise with us, the Marquess said coolly. Look at your soldier-friend Brian there. He seems happy enough in our company! Aren't you, Comrade Brian?

Brian nodded mutely, waving a filth-smeared hand.

You don't yet grasp the genius of our Captain's strategy, the Marquess said. We stand in the heart of the British capital, the one area on Earth that Britain's imperial elite are unwilling to devastate in the pursuit of their evil hegemony. The Rad Lords will not shell and burn their own precious London to quell what they falsely think a period of passing unrest. But! He raised one gloved forefinger. When we mount the barricades throughout this city, then they will have to struggle hand-to-hand with an aroused working-class, men nerved to the marrow with the first true freedom they have ever known!

The Marquess stopped a moment, wheezing for breath at the foetid air. Most of the oppressor-class, he continued, coughing, have already fled London, to escape the Stink! When they attempt to return, the risen masses will meet them with fire and steel! We will fight them from the roof-tops, from doorways, alleyways, sewers, and rookeries! He paused to dab his nose with a snotty kerchief from his sleeve. We will sequester every sinew of organized oppression. The newspapers, the telegraph lines and pneumatic tube-ways, the palaces and barracks and bureaux! We will put them all to the great cause of liberation!

Mallory waited, but it seemed that the young fanatic had at last run out of steam. And you want us to help you, eh? Join this people's army of yours?

Of course!

What's in it for us, then?

Everything, the Marquess said. Forever.

There were handsome ships moored inside the West India Docks, tangled rigging and steamer-stacks. The water within the Docks, a byway from the sewage-flow of the Thames, did not seem quite so foul to Mallory, until he saw, floating amid thin wads of slime, the bodies of dead men. Murdered sailors, the skeleton crews that shipping-lines left to guard their ships in harbor. The corpses floated like driftwood, a sight to chill the marrow. Mallory counted fifteen bodies, possibly sixteen, as he followed the Marquess along the gantry-shrouded wooden dockway. Perhaps, he theorized, most of the crews had been killed elsewhere, or else recruited to swell the ranks of Swing's piracy. Not all sailors were loyal to order and authority. The Ballester-Molina pistol was a cold weight against Mallory's gut.

The Marquess and his black led them blithely on. They passed a deserted ship where an ugly vapor, steam or smoke, curled up ominously from the hatches below-decks. A quartet of anarchist guards, their carbines propped in a crude stack, played cards atop a barricade of bales of looted calico.

Other guards, drunken, whiskered wretches in bad plug-hats and worse trousers, armed derelicts, slept in toppled barrows and loading-sledges, amid a swelling debris of barrels, baskets, hawser-coils and loading-ramps, heaps of black coal for the silenced steam-derricks. From the warehouses across the water, to the south, came a ragged volley of distant popping gunshots. The Marquess showed no interest, did not break stride, did not even look.

You overpowered all these ships? Mallory inquired. You must have a deal of men. Comrade Marquess!

More by the hour, the Marquess assured him. Our men are combing Limehouse, rousing every working family. Do you know the term 'exponential growth, ' Comrade Ned?

Why, no, Mallory lied.

Mathematical clacking-term, the Marquess lectured absently. Very interesting field. Engine-clacking, no end of use in the scientific study of socialism  He seemed distracted now, nervous. Another day of Stink like this and we'll have more men than the London police-force! You're not the first coves I've recruited, you know! I'm quite an old hand at it, by now. Why, I wager even my man Jupiter could do it! He slapped the shoulder of the man's livery-coat.

The man showed no reaction. Mallory wondered if he were deaf-and-dumb. He wore no breathing-mask. Perhaps he did not need one.

The Marquess led them to the greatest among a series of warehouses. Even among the stellar names of commerce Whitby's, Evan-Hare, Aaron's, Madras & Pondicherry Co., this was a very palace of mercantile modernity. Its vast loading-doors had risen on a clever system of jointed counterweights, revealing an interior of steel-frame construction, with translucent plate-glass vaulting a roof that stretched wide and long as a soccer-green. Below this roof grew a maze of steel braces, a fret-work of ratchets and wheeled tracking, where Engine-driven pulley-cans could run along like spiders. Somewhere pistons chugged, with the familiar popping racket of an Engine printing-press.

But the press was hidden somewhere behind a maze of booty to stupefy a Borgia. Merchandise lay in heaps, haystacks, mountains brocades, lounge-chairs, carriage-wheels, epergnes and chandeliers, tureens, mattresses, iron lawn-dogs and Parian birdbaths, billiard-tables and liquor-cabinets, bedsteads and stair-newels, rolled rugs and marble mantelpieces

 'Struth! Tom cried. How did you do all this?

We've been here for days now, the Marquess said. He tugged the kerchief from his face, revealing a pale visage of almost girlish beauty, with a downy blond mustache. There are goods in plenty, still, in the other godowns, and you shall all have a chance for a turn at the sledge and barrow. It's grand fun. And it's yours, for it belongs to all of us, equally!

All of us? Mallory said.

Of course. All the comrades.

Mallory pointed at the man. What about him?

What, my man Jupiter? The Marquess blinked. Jupiter belongs to all of us too, of course! He's not my servant alone, but the servant of the common good. The Marquess mopped his dripping nose on a kerchief. Follow me.

The heaping of booty had made a monster rat's-nest of the warehouse's scientific storage-plan. Following the Marquess, they picked their way across shoals of broken crystal, puddles of cooking-oil, a crunchy alleyway littered with peanut-hulls.

Odd, the Marquess muttered, when last I was here, the comrades were all about the place 

The heaps of goods dwindled toward the rear of the warehouse. They passed the whacking printing-press, hidden from sight in a cul-de-sac of towering bundles of news-print. Someone threw a bundle of wet printing-bills over the barricade, almost striking the Marquess, who hopped deftly over it.

Mallory became aware of a distant voice, high-pitched and shrill.

At the very rear of the warehouse, a large section of floor-space had been made into an impromptu lecture-hall. A chalkboard, a table piled with glassware, and a lectern, all sat unsteadily on a stage of close-packed soap-crates. Mismatched sets of cheap dining-chairs, in pressed oak and maple veneer, served as seating for a silent audience of perhaps three score.

So here they are, said the Marquess, with an odd quaver in his voice. You're in luck! Dr. Barton is favoring us with an exposition. Seat yourselves at once, comrades. You will, I assure you, find this well worth your attention!

To his vast surprise, Mallory found himself and his companions forced to join the audience, in the final row of chairs. The man remained standing, hands clasped behind his back, at the rear of the hall.

Mallory, seated next to the Marquess, rubbed his smarting eyes in disbelief. This speaker of yours is wearing a dress!

Hush, the Marquess whispered urgently.

The female lecturer, brandishing a chalk-tipped ebony pointer, was hectoring the seated crowd in a voice of shrill but closely measured fanaticism. The strange acoustics of the makeshift hall warped her words as if she were speaking through a drumhead. Some kind of queer temperance lecture it seemed, for she was decrying the poison alcohol and its threat to the revolutionary spirit of the working-class. She had flasks, great glass-stoppered carboys, full of liquor on her table. They were labeled with the skull-and-crossbones, amid a truck of distillation-flasks, red rubber-tubing, wire cages, and laboratory gas-rings.

Tom, at Mallory's right, tapped Mallory's arm and whispered in a voice of near-terror, Ned! Ned! Is that Lady Ada?

My God, boy, Mallory hissed, the hair prickling in fear all across his arms and neck, what makes you think that? Of course it isn't she!

Tom looked relieved, puzzled, vaguely offended. Who is it, then?

The lecturing female turned to the chalkboard, and wrote, in a ladylike cursive, the words Neurasthenic Degeneracy. She turned, aimed a false and brilliant smile at the audience over her shoulder, and for the first time Mallory recognized her.

She was Florence Russell Bartlett.

Mallory stiffened in his chair with a half-stifled gasp of shock. Something—a fleck of dry cotton from within his mask—lodged like a barb in his throat. He began coughing. And he could not stop. His slimy throat was lacerated. He tried to smile, to whisper a word of apology, but his windpipe seemed pinched in iron bands. Mallory fought the racking spasms with all his strength, hot tears gushing freely, but he could not stop himself, nor even muffle the nightmare hacking. It called a deadly attention to him like a coster-monger's bellow. At last Mallory jerked to his feet, knocking his chair back with a clatter, and staggered away half-bent, half-blinded.

He tottered, arms outstretched, through the blurry wilderness of booty, his feet tangling in something, some wooden object falling with a clatter. Somehow he found a spot of shelter, and bent there shaking violently, his breath choked now by a loathsome bolus of phlegm and vomit. I could die from this, he thought in desperation, his eyes bulging in their sockets. Something will rupture. My heart will burst.

Then somehow the clog was gone, the fit defeated. Mallory drew a ragged squeak of air, coughed, found his wind and began to breathe. He wiped foul spittle from his beard with his bare hand, and found himself leaning against a piece of statuary. It was a life-sized Hindu maiden in Coate's patent artificial stone, half-nude, with a water-jug poised on her draperied hip. The jug was solid stone, of course, though every atom in him cried out for a cleansing sip of water.

Someone clapped him firmly on the back. He turned, expecting Tom or Brian, and found the Marquess there.

Are you quite all right?

A passing fit, Mallory croaked. He waved one hand, unable to straighten.

The Marquess slipped a curved silver flask into his hand. Here, he said. This will help.

Mallory, expecting brandy, tilled the flask to his lips. A treacly concoction, tasting vaguely of licorice and elm, flooded his mouth. He swallowed reluctantly. What—what is this?

One of Dr. Barton's herbal remedies, the Marquess told him, a specific against the foetor. Here, let me soak your mask in it; the fumes will clear your lungs.

I'd rather you didn't, Mallory rasped.

Are you fit then to return to the lecture?

No! No.

The Marquess looked skeptical. Dr. Barton is a medical genius! She was the first woman ever to graduate with honors from Heidelberg. If you knew the wonders she's worked among the sick in France, the poor wretches given up for dead by the so-called experts—

I know, Mallory blurted. Something like strength returned to him, and with it a strong urge to throttle the Marquess, shake this damned and dangerous little fool till the nonsense squeezed out of him like paste. He felt a suicidal urge to blurt out the truth, that he knew this Barton to be a poisoner, an adulteress, a vitrioleuse, wanted by police in at least two countries. He could whisper that confession, then kill the Marquess of Hastings and stuff his wretched body under something.

The fit left him, replaced with a rational cunning cold and brittle as ice. I should rather talk with you, comrade, said Mallory, than listen to any lecture.

Really? said Hastings, brightening.

Mallory nodded earnestly. I I find I always profit by listening to a man who truly knows his business.

I cannot make you out, comrade, the Marquess said. Sometimes you seem to me a typical self-seeking fool, but then again you seem a man of quite sophisticated understanding—certainly a cut above those friends of yours!

I've traveled a bit, Mallory said slowly. I suppose it broadens a man.

Traveled where, comrade?

Mallory shrugged. Argentina. Canada. On the Continent, here and there.

The Marquess glanced about them, as if looking for spies a-lurk in the birdbaths and chandeliers. When none showed, he seemed to relax a bit, then spoke with a renewed but quiet urgency. Might you know the American South at all? The Confederacy?

Mallory shook his head.

There's a city called Charleston, in South Carolina. A charming town. It has a large community of well-born British exiles, who fled the Rads. Britain's ruined cavaliers.

Very nice, Mallory grunted.

Charleston is as refined and cultured a city as any in Britain.

And you were born there, eh? Mallory had blundered to speak this deduction aloud, for Hastings was sensitive about it, and frowned. Mallory hastened on. You must have prospered in Charleston, to own a man.

I do hope you are not an anti-slavery bigot, the Marquess said. So many Britons are. I suppose you would have me pack poor Jupiter off to one of those fever-ridden jungles in Liberia!

Mallory restrained his nod of agreement. He was in fact an abolitionist, and a supporter of man repatriation.

Poor Jupiter wouldn't last a day in the Liberian Empire, the Marquess insisted. Do you know he can read and write? I myself taught him. He even reads poetry.

Your man reads verse?

Not 'verse'—poesy. The great poets. John Milton—but you've never heard of him, I wager.

One of Cromwell's ministers, Mallory said readily, author of the 'Areopagitica'.

The Marquess nodded. He seemed pleased. John Milton wrote an epic poem, 'Paradise Lost'. It's a Biblical story, in blank verse.

I'm an agnostic myself, Mallory said.

Do you know the name of William Blake? He wrote and illustrated his own books of poems.

Couldn't find a proper publisher, eh?

There are still fine poets in England. Did you ever hear of John Wilson Croker? Winthrop Mackworth Praed? Bryan Waller Procter?

I might have, Mallory said. I read a bit—penny-dreadfuls, mostly. He was puzzled by the Marquess's strange interest in this arcane topic. And Mallory was worried about Tom and the others—what they must be thinking as they sat and waited for him. They might lose all patience and try something rash, and that wouldn't do.

Percy Bysshe Shelley was a poet, before he led the Luddites in the Time of Troubles, the Marquess said. Know that Percy Shelley lives! Byron exiled him to the island of St. Helena. He remains a prisoner there, in the manse of Napoleon the First. Some say he's since written whole books of plays and sonnets there.

Nonsense, Mallory said, Shelley died in prison ages ago.

He lives, the Marquess said. Not many know that.

Next you'll be saying that Charles Babbage wrote poetry, Mallory said, his nerves raw. What's the point of this?

It's a theory of mine, the Marquess said. Not so much a proper theory, as a poetic intuition. But since studying the writings of Karl Marx—and of course the great William Collins—it has come to me that some dire violence has been done to the true and natural course of historical development. The Marquess paused, smirked. But I doubt you can understand me, my poor fellow!

Mallory shook his head roughly. I understand well enough. A Catastrophe, you mean.

Yes. You might well call it that.

History works by Catastrophe! It's the way of the world, the only way there is, has been, or ever will be. There is no history—there is only contingency!

The Marquess's composure shattered. You're a liar!

Mallory felt the foolish insult gall him to the quick. Your head's full of phantoms, boy! 'History'! You think you should have a title and estates and I should rot in Lewes making hats. There's nothing more to it than that! You little fool, the Rads don't care tuppence for you or Marx or Collins or any of your poetic mummeries! They'll kill the lot of you here like rats in a sawdust pit.

You're not what you seem, the Marquess said. He had gone as white as paper. Who are you? What are you?

Mallory tensed.

The boy's eyes widened. A spy. He went for his gun.

Mallory punched him full in the face. As the Marquess reeled back, Mallory caught his arm and clubbed him, once, twice, across the head, with the heavy barrel of the Ballester-Molina. The Marquess fell bleeding.

Mallory snatched up the second pistol, rose, glanced about him.

The man stood not five yards away.

I saw that, Jupiter said quietly.

Mallory was silent. He leveled both guns at the man.

You struck my master. Have you killed him?

I think not, Mallory said.

The man nodded. He spread his open palms, gently, a gesture like a blessing. You were right, sir, and he was quite wrong. There is nothing to history. No progress, no justice. There is nothing but random horror.

That's as may be, Mallory said slowly, but if you cry out I will have to shoot you.

If you had killed him, I should have certainly cried out, the man said.

Mallory glanced back. He's still breathing.

There was a long silence. The man stood quite still, his posture stiff and perfect, undecided, unmoving, like a Platonic cone balanced perfectly upon its needle tip, waiting for some impetus beyond causality to determine the direction of its fall.

The man sighed. I'm going back to New York City,  he said. He turned on one polished heel and walked away, unhurried, vanishing into the looming barricades of goods.

Mallory felt quite certain that the man would not cry out, but he waited a few moments for the evidence that would confirm that belief. The Marquess stirred where he lay, and groaned. Mallory whipped the paisley kerchief from the man's curly head and gagged him with it.

It was the work of a moment to shove him behind a massive terra-cotta urn.

The shock of action had left Mallory dry. His throat felt like bloodied sandpaper. There was nothing to drink—except of course that silver flask of quack potion. Mallory dragged it by feel from the Marquess's jacket-pocket, and wet his throat. It left a numbing tingle at the back of his palate, like dry champagne. It was vile, but it seemed to be bracing him, somehow. He helped himself to a number of swallows.

Mallory returned to the lecture-area and took a seat beside Fraser. The policeman lifted one brow in silent query. Mallory patted the butt of the Marquess's pistol, lodged within his waistband opposite the Ballester-Molina. Fraser nodded, by a fraction.

Florence Russell Bartlett was continuing her harangue, her stage-manner seeming to afflict her audience with an occult paralysis. Mallory saw to his shock and disgust that Mrs. Bartlett was displaying quack devices intended to avert pregnancy. A disk of flexible rubber, a wad of sponge with a thread attached. Mallory could not avoid the dark imagining of coitus involving these queer objects. The thought made his gut lurch.

She killed a rabbit a moment ago, Fraser hissed from the corner of his mouth. Dipped its nose in essence of cigar.

I didn't kill the boy,  Mallory whispered in return. Concussed, I think  He watched Bartlett as her rant drifted into queer plans for selective breeding to improve the stock of humanity. In her futurity, it seemed, proper marriage would be abolished. Universal free love would replace chastity. Reproduction would be a matter for experts. The concepts swam like dark shadows at the shore of Mallory's mind. It struck him then, for no seeming reason, that this day—this very afternoon in fact—was the time specified for his own triumphant lecture on the Brontosaurus, with kinotrope accompaniment by Mr. Keats. The fearful coincidence sent a queer shiver through him.

Brian leaned suddenly across Fraser, seizing Mallory's bare wrist in a grip of iron. Ned! he hissed. Let's get out of this damned place!

Not yet, Mallory said. But he was shaken. A mesmeric flow of sheer panic seemed to jolt into him, through Brian's grip. We don't know yet where Swing is hiding; he could be anywhere in this warren—

Comrades! Bartlett sang out, in a voice like an iced razor. Yes, you four, in the back! If you must disturb us—if you have news of such pressing interest—then surely you should share it with the other comrades in the Chautauqua!

The four of them froze.

Bartlett raked them with a Medusa glare. The other listeners, freed somehow from their queer bondage, turned to glare backward with bloodthirsty glee. The eyes of the crowd glowed with a nasty pleasure, the relief of wretches who find their own destined punishment falling elsewhere—

Tom and Brian spoke both at once, in frenzied whispers.

Does she mean us?

My God, what do we do?

Mallory felt trapped in nightmare. A word would break it, he thought. She's just a woman, he said, quite loudly and calmly.

Knife it! Fraser hissed. Be still!

Nothing to tell us? Bartlett taunted. I thought not—

Mallory rose to his feet. I do have something to say!

With the speed of jack-in-the-boxes, three men rose from within the audience, their hands raised. Dr. Barton! Dr. Barton?

Bartlett nodded graciously, gestured with the chalk-wand. Comrade Pye has the floor.

Dr. Barton, cried Pye, I do not recognize these comrades. They are behaving regressively, and I—I think they should be criticized!

A fierce silence wrapped the crowd.

Fraser yanked at Mallory's trouser-leg. Sit down, you fool! Have you lost your mind?

I do have news! Mallory shouted, through his gingham mask. News for Captain Swing!

Bartlett seemed shocked; her eyes darted back and forth. Tell it to all of us, then, she commanded. We're all of one mind here!

I know where the Modus is, Mrs. Bartlett! Mallory shouted. Do you want me to tell that to all these dupes and slaveys?

Chairs clattered as men leapt to their feet. Bartlett shrieked something lost in the noise.

I want Swing! I must speak to him alone! As chaos rose, Mallory kicked the empty chair before him into skidding flight, and yanked both pistols from his belt. Sit down, you bastards! He leveled his pistols at the audience. I'll blow daylight through the first coward that stirs!

His answer was a fusillade of shots.

Run! Brian screeched. He, Tom, and Fraser fled at once.

Chairs splintered, toppling, on either side of Mallory. The audience was shooting at him, ragged popping shots. Mallory leveled both his pistols at Bartlett at her podium, and squeezed the triggers.

Neither gun fired. He had neglected to cock the hammers. The Marquess's gun seemed to have some kind of nickeled safety-switch.

Someone nearby threw a chair at Mallory; he fended it off, absently, but then something struck him hard in the foot. The blow was sharp enough to numb his leg, and knock him from his stance; he took the opportunity to retreat.

He could not seem to run properly. Perhaps he had been crippled. Bullets sang past him with a nostalgic drone from far Wyoming.

Fraser beckoned at him from the mouth of a side-alley. Mallory ran to him, turned, skidded.

Fraser stepped coolly into the open, raising his copper's pepperbox in a dueling stance, right arm extended, body turned to present a narrow target, head held keen-eyed and level. He fired twice, and there were screams.

Fraser took Mallory's arm. This way! Mallory's heart was jumping like a rabbit, and he could not get his foot to work.

He limped down the alley. It ended abruptly. Fraser searched frantically for a crawl-way. Tom was boosting Brian atop a great unsteady heap of cartons.

Mallory stopped beside his brothers, turned, raised both pistols. He glanced down swiftly at his foot. A stray bullet had knocked the heel from his shoe. He looked up an instant later to see half-a-dozen screaming bandits approaching in hot pursuit.

A vast concussion shook the building. Heaps of tinned goods clattered to the floor in a billow of powder-smoke. Mallory gaped.

All six of the wretches lay sprawled and blasted in the alley, as if lightning-struck.

Ned! shouted Brian, from atop his heap of cartons. Get their weapons! He crouched there on one knee, the Russian pistol gushing smoke from its opened loading-chamber. He loaded a second cartridge of brass and red waxed-paper, as thick as a copper's baton.

Mallory, ears ringing, lunged forward, then slipped and almost fell headlong in the spreading blood. He grabbed right-handed for support and the Ballester-Molina went off, its bullet whanging from an iron beam overhead. Mallory paused, uncocked it carefully, uncocked the Marquess's pistol as well, stuck them both into his belt, precious seconds ticking as he dithered.

The alley was awash with blood. The blunderbuss blast of the Russian hand-cannon had lacerated the men hideously. One poor devil was still gurgling as Mallory pried a Victoria carbine from beneath him, its stock dripping red. He struggled with the fellow's bandolier, but gave that up for another's wooden-handled Yankee revolver. Something stung his palm as he snatched up the pistol. Mallory looked stupidly at his wounded hand, then at the pistol-butt. There was a corkscrewed bit of hot shrapnel embedded in the wood, a razored thing like a big metal-shaving.

Rifles began to crack from a distance, slugs plowing into the bounty around them with odd crunches and a musical tinkling of glass. Mallory! This way, Fraser shouted.

Fraser had uncovered a crevice along the warehouse wall. Mallory turned to sling the carbine and look for Brian, seeing the young artilleryman leap across the alley for another vantage-point.

He followed Fraser into the crevice, grunting and heaving, for several yards along the wall. Bullets began whacking into the brick, before them and behind them, but well above their heads. Ill-aimed shots burst the tin-sheet roof with drum-like metal bangs. Mallory emerged to find Tom working like a demon in an open cul-de-sac, flinging up a barricade of spindle-legged ladies' vanity-tables. The things lay piled in a white-lacquered heap like dead tropical spiders.

The cracking of rifles, sharper now, made the warehouse a cacophony. From behind them Mallory heard shouts of rage and fear over the dead.

Tom drove a length of iron bedstead into a heap of crates, put his back into it, and toppled the mess with a crash. How many? Tom panted.

Six.

Tom smiled like a madman. That's more than they'll ever kill of us. Where's Brian now?

I don't know. Mallory unslung the carbine, handed it to Tom. Tom took it by the barrel and held it at arm's-length, surprised by its caking of gore.

Fraser, maintaining close watch at the crevice, fired his pepperbox. There was an awful, girlish scream and a thrashing, like a poisoned rat in a wall.

Bullets began to plunge into the rubble around them with somewhat greater accuracy, attracted by the scream. A thumb-sized conical slug fell from nowhere at Mallory's feet and spun like a top on the floor-boards.

Fraser tapped his shoulder. Mallory turned. Fraser had tugged the mask from his face; his eyes glittered and stubble showed black on his pale chin. How now, Dr. Mallory? What new inspired maneuver?

That might well have worked, you know, Mallory protested. She might have taken us straight to Swing if she'd believed me. There's no accounting for women 

Oh, she believed you right-enough, said Fraser, and suddenly he laughed, a strange dry chuckling like the rubbing of resined wood. Well, what do you have there?

Pistol? Mallory offered Fraser the salvaged revolver. Mind that bit of shrapnel in it.

Fraser scraped the embedded barb free on his boot-heel. Never saw the like of that lad's barker! I rather doubt it's legal, even for one of your gallant Crimea heroes.

A rifle-shot knocked a spinning chunk from one of the vanity-tables, narrowly missing Fraser. Mallory looked up, startled. Damn! A distant sniper clung monkey-like to one of the iron rafters, fitting another round into his rifle.

Mallory snatched the Victoria from Tom, braced the bloodied strap around his forearm, and took close aim. He squeezed the trigger. To no effect, for the single-shot had been fired already. But the sniper's mouth opened in an O of terror and he leapt from his perch with a distant crash.

Mallory yanked the bolt back, flinging the dead cartridge. I should have taken that damned bandolier—

Ned! Brian appeared suddenly to their left, crouched at the top of a heap. Over here—cotton-bales!

Right! They followed Brian's lead, scrambling and heaving atop the booty in a cascade of whalebone and candlesticks. Bullets whizzed and thwacked around them—more men in the rafters, Mallory thought, too busy to look. Fraser rose once and took a pot-shot, to no apparent effect.

Dozens of hundred-weight bales of Confederate ginned cotton, wrapped in rope and burlap, had been stacked almost to the rafters.

Brian gestured wildly, then vanished over the far side of the cotton-stack. Mallory understood him it was a natural fortress, with a little work.

He and Tom heaved and toppled one of the bales free from the top of the stack, stepping into the cavity. Bullets thumped with gentle huffs into the cotton as Fraser rose and returned fire.

They kicked out another bale, and then a third. Fraser joined them in the excavation, with a leap and a stumble. In a frantic, heaving minute they had burrowed their way into the thick of it, like ants amid a box of cube sugar.

Their position was obvious now; bullets popped and thudded into the cotton fortress, but to no effect. Mallory yanked a great clean wad and wiped sweat and blood from his face and arms. It was dire hard work, hauling cotton-bales; no wonder the Southrons had relegated it to their darkeys.

Fraser cleared a narrow space between two bales. Give me another pistol. Mallory handed him the Marquess's long-barreled revolver. Fraser squeezed off a shot, squinted, nodded. Fine piece A volley of futile shots came in reply. Tom, grunting and heaving, cleared more space by lifting and dropping a bale off the back of the heap; it struck something with a crash like a splintering pianola.

They took inventory. Tom had a derringer with one loaded chamber; useful, perhaps, if the anarchists swarmed in like boarding pirates, but not otherwise. Mallory's Ballester-Molina had three rounds. Fraser's pepperbox had three caps left, and the Marquess's gun five rounds. And they had an empty Victoria carbine, and Fraser's little truncheon.

There was no sign of Brian.

There were angry, muffled shouts in the depths of the warehouse—orders. Mallory thought. The gunfire died away quite suddenly, replaced by an ominous silence, broken by rustling and what seemed to be hammering. He peered up over the edge of a forward bale. There was no visible enemy, but the doors of the warehouse had been shut.

Gloom flew across the warehouse in a sudden wave. Beyond the glazed vaulting of the ceiling, it had grown swiftly and astonishingly dark, as if the Stink had thickened further.

Should we make a run for it? whispered Tom.

Not without Brian, Mallory said.

Fraser shook his head dourly—not speaking his doubt, but it was clear enough.

They worked in the gloom for a while, clearing space, digging in deeper, heaving up some of the bales to serve as crenellations. At the sound of their activity, more shots came, muzzle-flashes savagely lighting the darkness, bullets screaming off iron braces overhead. Here and there in the heaps of merchandise, the kindled light of lanterns glowed.

More shouted orders, and the firing ceased. There was a flurry of pattering on the metal roof, swiftly gone.

What was that? Tom asked.

Sounded like rats scampering, Mallory said.

Rain! Fraser suggested.

Mallory said nothing. Another ash-fall seemed far more likely.

The gloom lightened again, quite suddenly. Mallory peered over the edge. A crowd of the rascals were creeping forward, almost to the foot of the ramparts, barefoot and in hushed silence, some with knives in their teeth. Mallory bellowed in alarm and began firing.

He was blinded at once by his own muzzle-flashes, but the Ballester-Molina, kicking and pumping, seemed to have a life of its own; in an instant the three remaining rounds were gone. Not wasted, though; at such short range he had not been able to miss. Two men were down, a third crawling, and the rest fleeing in terror.

Mallory could hear them re-grouping out of sight, milling, cursing each other. Mallory, his gun empty, grasped its hot barrel like a club.

The building shook with the awful roar of Brian's pistol.

The silence afterward was broken by agonized screams. A long and harrowing minute passed then, filled with infernal yells from the wounded and dying, with a crashing, a cursing and clattering.

Suddenly a dark form came catapulting into their midst, stinking of gunpowder.

Brian.

Good job you didn't shoot me, he said. Damme, it's dark in here, ain't it?

Are ye all right, lad? Mallory said.

Nicks, Brian said, getting to his feet. Look what I brought ye, Ned.

He passed the thing into Mallory's hands. The smooth heavy form of stock and barrel fit Mallory's grip like silk. It was a buffalo-rifle.

They've a whole crate of such beauties, Brian said. Out in a pokey little office, across the way. And munitions with it, though I could only carry two boxes.

Mallory began loading the rifle at once, round after brassy round clicking into the spring-loader with a ticking like fine clockwork.

Queer business, Brian said. Don't think they knew I was loose among them. No proper sense of strategy. Don't seem to be any Army traitors among this rabble, I'll tell you that!

That barker of yours is a marvel, lad, Fraser said.

Brian grunted. Not anymore, Mr. Fraser. I'd only two rounds. Wish I'd held back, but when I saw that lovely chance for enfilading-fire. I'd got to take it.

Never you mind, Mallory told him, caressing the rifle's walnut stock. If we'd four of these, we could hold 'em back all week.

My apologies! Brian said. But I won't be doing much more of a proper reconnaissance-in-force. They winged me a bit.

A stray bullet had seared across the front of Brian's shin. White bone showed in the shallow wound and his filth-caked boot was full of blood. Fraser and Tom wadded clean cotton against the wound while Mallory kept watch with the rifle.

Enough, Brian protested at last, you fellows carry on to beat Lady Nightingale. D'ye see anything, Ned?

No, Mallory said. I hear them plotting mischief, though.

They're back in three mustering-grounds, Brian said. They had a rally-point just out of your line-of-fire, but I raked 'em there with the Tsar's slag-shot. I doubt they'll rush us again. They've not got the nerve for it now.

What will they do, then?

Some sort of sapper's work. I'd wager, Brian said. Advancing barricades, perhaps something on wheels. He spat dryly. Damme, I need a drink. I haven't been this dry since Lucknow.

Sorry, Mallory said.

Brian sighed. We had a very pukka water-boy with the regiment in India. That bleeding little Hindu was worth any ten of these buggers!

Did you see the woman? Fraser asked him. Or Captain Swing?

No, Brian said. I was staying to cover, creeping about. Looking for a better class of firearm, mostly, something with a range. Queer things I saw, too. Found Ned's game-rifle in a little office-room, not a soul in it but a little clerky chap, writing at a desk. Pair of candles burning, papers all scattered about. Full of crated guns for export, and why they're keeping those fine rifles back with some clerk, and passing out Victorias, is beyond my professional understanding.

A wave of drowned and greenish light passed into the building—outlining, as it passed, an armed man rising up a pulley-line, seated in a noose. Swift as thought. Mallory centered his bead on the man, exhaled, fired. The man flopped backward, dangled from his knees, hung limp.

Rifle-fire began to smack into the cotton. Mallory ducked down again.

Fine emplacements, cotton-bales, said Brian with satisfaction, patting the burlapped floor. Hickory Jackson hid behind 'em in New Orleans, and gave us a toweling, too.

What happened in the office-room, Brian? Tom asked.

Fellow rolled himself a sort of papirosi, Brian said. Know those? Turkish baccy-wraps. 'Cept the bugger took an eye-dropper from a little medical vial, dribbled it about on the paper first, then wrapped some queer leaf from a candy jar. I'd a proper look at his face when he lit his smoke from the candle, and he'd a very absent look, deluded you might say, rather like brother Ned here with one of his scholarly problems! Brian laughed drily, meaning no harm. Scarcely seemed right to disturb his fancy then, so I took a rifle and a box or two real quiet-like, and left!

Tom laughed.

You'd a good look, eh? Mallory asked.

Surely.

Fellow had a bump on his forehead, right here?

Damme if he didn't!

That was Captain Swing, Mallory said.

Then I'm a chuckleheaded fool! Brian cried. Didn't seem right to shoot a man in the back, but if I'd knowed it was him I'd have blowed his lumpy headpiece off!

Doctor Edward Mallory! a voice cried, from the darkened floor below.

Mallory rose, peered around a bale. The Marquess of Hastings stood below them, his head bandaged and a lantern in one hand. He waved a white kerchief on a stick.

Leviathan Mallory, a parley with you! the Marquess shouted.

Speak up then, Mallory said, careful not to show his head.

You're trapped here, Dr. Mallory! But we've an offer for you. If you'll tell us where you've hidden a certain object of value, which you stole, then we'll let you and your brothers go free. But your police-spy from the Special Bureau must stay. We have questions for him.

Mallory laughed him to scorn. Hear me, Hastings, and all the rest of you! Send us that maniac Swing and his murdering tart, with their hands bound! Then we'll let the rest of you creep out of here before the Army comes!

A show of insolence avails you nothing, the Marquess said. We shall fire that cotton, and you'll roast like a brace of rabbits!

Mallory turned. Can he do that?

Cotton won't burn worth a hang when it's packed tight as this, Brian theorized.

Surely, burn it! Mallory shouted. Burn down the whole godown and smother to death in the smoke.

You've been very bold. Dr. Mallory, and very lucky. But our choicest men patrol the streets of Limehouse now, liquidating the police! Soon they shall return, hardened soldiers, veterans of Manhattan! They'll take your little hideaway by storm, at the point of the bayonet! Come out now, while you've yet a chance to live!

We fear no Yankee rabble! Bring 'em on, for a taste of grapeshot!

We've made our offer! Reason it through, like a proper savant!

Go to hell, Mallory said. Send me Swing; I want to talk to Swing! I've had my fill of you, you poncey little traitor.

The Marquess retreated. After some moments, a desultory firing began. Mallory expended half a box of cartridges, returning fire at the muzzle-flashes.

The anarchists then commenced the painful work of advancing a siege-engine. It was an improvised phalanx of three heavy dolly-carts, their fronts lashed with a sloping armor of marbled table-tops. The rolling armor was too wide to fit down the crooked alley to the cotton-bales, so the rebels dug their way through the heaps of goods, piling them up by the flanks of the freight-dollies. Mallory wounded two of them at their work, but they grew wiser with experience, and soon had erected a covered walkway behind the advancing siege-works.

There seemed to be far more men in the warehouse now. It had grown darker yet, but lantern-light showed here and there and the iron beams were full of snipers. There was loud talk—argument it seemed—to add to the groans of the wounded.

The siege-works crept closer yet. They were now below Mallory's best line-of-fire. If he exposed himself in an attempt to lean over the ramparts, without doubt the snipers would hit him.

The siege-works reached the base of the cotton-bales. There was a sound of shredding at the base of the wall.

A warped and muffled voice—assisted perhaps by a megaphone—sounded from within the siege-works. Dr. Mallory!

Yes?

You asked for me—here I am! We are toppling the wall of your palace, Dr. Mallory. Soon you will be quite exposed.

Hard work for a professional gambler. Captain Swing! Don't blister your delicate hands!

Tom and Fraser, who had been working in tandem, toppled a heavy cotton-bale onto the siege-works. It bounced off harmlessly. Well-concerted fire raked the fortress, sending the defenders diving for cover.

Cease fire! Swing shouted, and laughed.

Have a care, Swing! If you shoot me, you'll never learn where the Modus is hidden.

Still the Mustering fool! You stole the Modus from us at the Derby. You might have returned it to us, and spared yourself certain destruction! You stubborn ignoramus, you don't even have a notion of the thing's true purpose!

It belongs by right to the Queen of Engines, and I know that well enough.

If you think that, you know nothing.

I know it is Ada's, for she told me so. And she knows where it is hidden, for I told her where I keep it!

Liar! Swing shouted. If Ada knew, we would have it already. She is one of us!

Tom groaned aloud.

You are her tormentors. Swing!

I tell you Ada is ours.

The daughter of Byron would never betray the realm.

Byron's dead! Swing cried, with the terrible conviction of truth. And all that he built, all that you believe in, will now be swept away.

You're dreaming.

There was a long silence. Then Swing spoke again, in a new and coaxing voice. The Army now fires upon the people. Dr. Mallory.

Mallory said nothing.

The British Army, the very bulwark of your so-called civilization, now shoots your fellow citizens dead in the streets. Men and women with stones in their hands are being murdered with rapid-fire weapons. Can you not hear it?

Mallory made no reply.

You have built on sand, Dr. Mallory. The tree of your prosperity is rooted in dark murder. The masses can endure you no longer. Blood cries out from the seven-cursed streets of Babylondon!

Come out, Swing! Mallory cried. Come out of your darkness, let me see your face!

Not likely, Swing said.

There was another silence.

I intended to take you alive. Dr. Mallory, Swing said, in a voice of finality. But if you have truly confessed your secret to Ada Byron, then I have no more need of you. My trusted comrade, my life's companion—she holds the Queen of Engines in a perfect net! We shall have Lady Ada, and the Modus, and futurity as well. And you shall have the depths of the poisoned Thames for your sepulchre.

Kill us then, and stop your damned blather! Fraser shouted suddenly, stung beyond endurance. Special Branch will see you kicking at a rope's end if it takes a hundred years.

The voice of authority! Swing taunted. The almighty British Government! You're fine at mowing down poor wretches in the street, but let us see your bloated plutocrats take this warehouse, when we hold merchandise worth millions hostage here.

You must be completely mad, Mallory said.

Why do you suppose I chose this place as my headquarters? You are governed by shopkeepers, who value their precious goods more than any number of human lives! They will never fire on their own warehouses, their own shipping. We are impregnable here!

Mallory laughed. You utter jolterhead! If Byron's dead, then the Government is in the hands of Lord Babbage and his emergency committees. Babbage is a master pragmatist! He'll not be stayed by concern for any amount of merchandise.

Babbage is the pawn of the capitalists.

He's a visionary, you deluded little clown! Once he learns you're in here, he'll blast this place into the heavens without a second thought!

Thunder shook the building. There was a pattering against the roof.

It's raining! Tom cried.

It's artillery, Brian said.

No, listen—it's raining, Brian! The Stink is over! It's blessed rain!

An argument had broken out beneath the shelter of the siege-works. Swing was snarling at his men.

Cool water began dripping through the ragged fret-work of bullet-holes in the roof.

It's rain, Mallory said, and licked his hand. Rain! We've won, lads. Thunder rolled. Even if they kill us here, Mallory shouted, it's over for them. When London's air is sweet again, they'll have no place to hide.

It may be raining, Brian said, but those are ten-inch naval guns, off the river 

A shell tore through the roof in a torrent of blazing shrapnel.

They've got our range now! Brian shouted. For God's sake, take cover! He began to struggle desperately with the cotton-bales.

Mallory watched in astonishment as shell after shell punched through the roof, the holes as neatly spaced as the stabs of a shoemaker's awl. Whirlwinds of blazing rubbish flew, like the impact of iron comets.

The glass vaulting burst into a thousand knife-edged shards. Brian was screaming at Mallory, his voice utterly drowned by the cacophony. After a stunned moment, Mallory bent to help his brother, heaving up another cotton-bale and crouching within the trench.

He sat there, the rifle across his knees. Blasts of light sheeted across the buckling roof. Iron beams began to twist under pressure, their rivets popping like gunshots. The noise was hellish, supernatural. The warehouse shook like a sheet of beaten tin.

Brian, Tom, and Fraser crouched like praying Bedouins, their hands clamped to their ears. Bits of flaming wood and fabric fell gently onto the bales around them, jumping a bit with each repeated concussion, smoldering into the cotton where they lay. The warehouse billowed with air and heat.

Mallory absently plucked two wads of cotton and stuffed them into his ears.

A section of roofing collapsed, quite slowly, like the wing of a dying swan. Rain in torrents fought the fires below.

Beauty entered Mallory's soul. He stood, the rifle like a wand in his hands. The shelling had stopped, but the noise was incessant, for the building was on fire. Tongues of dirty flame leapt up in a hundred places, twisted fantastically by gusts of wind.

Mallory stepped to the edge of the cotton parapet. The shelling had knocked the covered walkway into fragments, like a muddy crawl-way of termites, crushed by a boot. Mallory stood, his head filled with the monotone roaring of absolute sublimity, and watched as his enemies fled screaming.

A man stopped amid the flames, and turned. It was Swing. He gazed up at Mallory where he stood. His face twisted with a desperate awe. He screamed something—screamed it louder still—but he was a little man, far away, and Mallory could not hear him. Mallory slowly shook his head.

Swing raised his weapon then. Mallory saw, with a glow of pleased surprise, the familiar outlines of a Cutts-Maudslay carbine.

Swing aimed the weapon, braced himself, and pulled the trigger. Pleasantly tenuous singing sounds surrounded Mallory, with a musical popping from the perforating roof behind him. Mallory, his hands moving with superb and unintentioned grace, raised his rifle, sighted, fired. Swing spun and fell sprawling. The Cutts-Maudslay, still in his grasp, continued its spring-driven jerking and clicking even after its drum of cartridges was empty.

Mallory watched, with tepid interest, as Fraser, leaping through the wreckage with a spidery agility, approached the fallen anarchist with his pistol drawn. He handcuffed Swing, then lifted him limply over one shoulder.

Mallory's eyes smarted. Smoke from the flaming warehouse was gathering under the wreckage of its roof. He looked down, blinking, to see Tom lowering a limping Brian to the floor.

The two joined Fraser, who beckoned sharply. Mallory smiled, descended, followed. The three then fled through the whipping, thickening fires, with Mallory strolling after them.

Catastrophe had knocked Swing's fortress open in a geyser of shattered brick dominos. Mallory, blissful, the nails of his broken shoe-heel grating, walked into a London reborn.

Into a tempest of cleansing rain.


On April 12, 1908, at the age of eighty-three, Edward Mallory died at his house in Cambridge. The exact circumstances of his death are obscured, steps having apparently been taken to preserve the proprieties incumbent on the decease of a former President of the Royal Society. The notes of Dr. George Sandys, Lord Mallory's friend and personal physician, indicate that the great savant died of a cerebral hemorrhage. Sandys also noted, apparently for purposes of his own, that the deceased had seemingly taken to his death-bed while wearing a patent set of elasticated underwear, socks with braces, and fully laced leather dress-shoes.

The doctor, a thorough man, also noted an item discovered beneath the deceased's flowing white beard. About the great man's neck, on a fine steel chain, was strung an antique lady's signet-ring which bore the crest of the Byron family and the motto CREDE BYRON. The doctor's ciphered note is the only known evidence of this apparent bequest, possibly a token of appreciation. Very probably, Sandys confiscated the ring, though a thorough catalogue of Sandys' possessions, made after his own death in 1940, makes no mention of it.

There is no mention of any such ring in the Mallory will, a very elaborate document of otherwise impeccable specificity.


Envision Edward Mallory in the scholarly office of his palatial Cambridge home. It is late. The great paleontologist, his field-days long behind him and his Presidency resigned, now devotes the winter of his life to matters of theory, and to the subtler outreaches of scientific administration.

Lord Mallory has long since modified the radical Catastrophist doctrines of his youth, gracefully abandoning the discredited notion that the Earth is no more than three hundred thousand years old—radioactive dating having proven otherwise. It is enough, for Mallory, that Catastrophism proved a fortunate road to higher geological truth, leading him to his greatest personal triumph the discovery, in 1865, of continental drift.

More than the Brontosaurs, more than the ceratopsian eggs of the Gobi Desert, it is this astonishing leap of reckless insight that has assured his immortal fame.

Mallory, who sleeps little, seats himself at a curvilinear Japanese desk of artificial ivory. Past the open curtains, incandescent bulbs gleam beyond the polychrome, abstractly patterned windows of his nearest neighbor. The neighbor's house, like Mallory's own, is a meticulously orchestrated riot of organic forms, roofed with iridescent ceramic dragon-scales—England's dominant style of modern architecture, though the mode itself has its turn-of-the-century origins in the thriving Republic of Catalonia.

Mallory has only recently dismissed a purportedly clandestine meeting of the Society of Light. As the final Hierarch of this dwindling confraternity, tonight he wears the formal robes of office. His woolen chasuble of royal indigo is fringed in scarlet. A floor-length indigo skirt of artificial silk, similarly fringed, is decorated with concentric bands of semiprecious stones. He has set aside a domed crown of beaded gold-plate, with a neck-guard of overlapping gilt scales; this rests now upon a small desk-printer.

He dons his spectacles, loads a pipe, fires it. His secretary, Cleveland, is a most punctilious and orderly man, and has left him two sets of documents, neatly squared atop the desk in folders of brass-clasped manila. One folder lies to his right, the other to his left, and it cannot be known which he will choose.

He chooses the folder to his left. It is an Engine-printed report from an elderly officer of the Meirokusha, a famous confraternity of Japanese scholars which serves, not incidentally, as the foremost Oriental chapter of the Society of Light. The precise text of the report cannot be found in England, but is preserved in Nagasaki along with an annotation indicating that it was wired to the Hierarch via standard channels on April 11. The text indicates that the Meirokusha, suffering a grave decline in membership and a growing lack of attendance, have voted to indefinitely postpone further meetings. It is accompanied by an itemized bill for refreshments, and rental fees for a small upstairs room in the Seiyoken, a restaurant in the Tsukiji quarter of Tokyo.

Lord Mallory, though this news is not unexpected, is filled with a sense of loss and bitterness. His temper, fierce at the best of times, has sharpened with old-age; his indignation swells to helpless rage.

An artery fails.

That chain of events does not occur.

He chooses the folder to his right. It is thicker than the one to his left, and this intrigues him. It contains a detailed field report from a Royal Society paleontological expedition to the Pacific coast of Western Canada. Pleased by an awakened nostalgia for his own expedition days, he studies the report closely.

The modern labor of science can scarcely be more different from that of his own day. The British scientists have flown to the mainland from the flourishing metropolis of Victoria, and have motored at their ease into the mountains from a luxurious base in the coastal village of Vancouver. Their leader, if he can be given this title, is a young Cambridge graduate named Morris, whom Mallory remembers as a queer, ringleted fellow, given to wearing velvet capes and elaborate Modernist hats.

The strata under examination are Cambrian, dark shale of a near-lithographic quality. And, it seems, they teem with a variety of intricate forms, the paper-thin and thoroughly crushed remnants of an ancient invertebrate fauna. Mallory, a vertebrate specialist, begins to lose interest; he has seen, he thinks, more trilobites than anyone ever should have to, and in truth he has always found it difficult to conjure up enthusiasm for anything less than two inches in length. Worse yet, the report's prose strikes him as unscientific, marked by a most untoward air of radical enthusiasm.

He turns to the plates.

There is a thing in the first plate that possesses five eyes. It has a long clawed nozzle instead of a mouth.

There is a legless, ray-like thing, all lobes and jelly, with a flat, fanged mouth that does not bite but irises shut.

There is a thing whose legs are fourteen horny, pointed spikes—a thing which has no head, no eyes, no gut, but does have seven tiny pincered mouths, each at the tip of a flexible tentacle.

These things bear no relation to any known creature, from any known period whatever.

A rush of blood and wonder mounts within Mallory's skull. A vortex of implications begins to sort itself within him, mounting step-by-step to a strange and numinous glow, an ecstatic rush toward utter comprehension, ever brighter, ever clearer, ever closer—

His head strikes the table as he slumps forward. He sprawls upon his back at the foot of the chair, limbs numb and airy, still soaring, wrapped within the light of marvel, the light of an awesome knowledge, pushing, pushing at the borders of the real—a knowledge that is dying to be born.



FIFTH ITERATION

The All-Seeing Eye

An afternoon in Horseferry Road, twelfth of November, 1855, image recorded by A. G. S. Hullcoop of the Department of Criminal Anthropometry.

The shutter of Hullcoop's Talbot Excelsior has captured eleven men descending the broad steps from the entrance of the Central Statistics Bureau. Triangulation locates Hullcoop, with his powerful lens, concealed atop the roof of a publishers' offices in Holywell Street.

Foremost among the eleven is Laurence Oliphant. His gaze, beneath the black brim of his top-hat, is mild and ironical.

The tall, dull-surfaced hats create a repeated vertical motif common to images of the period.

Like the others, Oliphant wears a dark frock-coat above narrow trousers of a lighter hue. His neck is wrapped in a high choker of dark silk. The effect is dignified and columnar, though something in Oliphant's manner manages to suggest the sportsman's lounging stroll.

The other men are barristers, Bureau functionaries, a senior representative of the Colgate Works. Behind them, above Horseferry Road, swoop the tarred copper cables of the Bureau's telegraphs.

Processes of resolution reveal the pale blurs dotting these lines to be pigeons.

Though the afternoon is unseasonably bright, Oliphant, a frequent visitor to the Bureau, is opening an umbrella.

The top-hat of the Colgate's representative displays an elongated comma of white pigeon-dung.


Oliphant sat alone in a small waiting-room, which communicated by a glazed door with a surgery. The buff-colored walls were hung with colored diagrams depicting the ravages of hideous diseases. A bookcase was crammed with dingy medical volumes. There were carved wooden pews that might have come from a wrecked church, and a coal-dyed woolen drugget in the middle of the floor.

He looked at a mahogany instrument-case and a huge roll of lint occupying places of their own on the bookcase.

Someone called his name.

He saw a face through the panes of the surgery door. Pallid, the bulging forehead plastered with drenched strands of dark hair.

Collins, he said.  'Captain Swing.'  And other faces, legion, the faces of the vanished, names suppressed from memory.

Mr. Oliphant?

Dr. McNeile regarded him from the doorway. Vaguely embarrassed, Oliphant rose from his pew, automatically straightening his coat.

Are you entirely well, Mr. Oliphant? Your expression was most extraordinary, just then. McNeile was slender and neatly bearded, with dark brown hair, his grey eyes so pale as to suggest transparency.

Yes, thank you, Dr. McNeile. And yourself?

Very well, thank you. Some remarkable symptoms are emerging, Mr. Oliphant, in the wake of recent events. I've one gentleman who was seated atop an omnibus, Regent Street, when that vehicle was struck broadside by a steam-gurney traveling at an estimated twenty miles per hour!

Really? How dreadful

To Oliphant's horror, McNeile actually rubbed his long white hands together. There was no evident physical trauma as a result of the collision. None. None whatever. He fixed Oliphant with that bright, nearly colorless gaze. Subsequently, we have observed insomnia, incipient melancholia, minor amnesiac episodes—numerous symptoms customarily associated with latent hysteria. McNeile smiled, a quick rictus of triumph. We have observed, Mr. Oliphant, a remarkably pure, that is to say, a clinical progression of railway spine!

McNeile bowed Oliphant through the doorway, into a handsomely paneled room, which was sparsely furnished with ominous electro-magnetic appliances. Oliphant removed his coat and waistcoat, arranging them upon a mahogany valet-stand.

And your 'spells,' Mr. Oliphant?

None, thank you, since the last treatment. Was this true? It was difficult to say, really.

And your sleep has been undisturbed?

I should say so. Yes.

Any dreams of note? Waking visions?

No.

McNeile stared with his pale eyes. Very well.

Oliphant, feeling utterly foolish in his braces and starched shirt-front, climbed upon McNeile's manipulation table, a curiously articulated piece of furniture that in equal parts resembled a chaise-lounge and a torturer's rack. The thing's various segments were upholstered in a stiff. Engine-patterned brocade, smooth and cold to the touch. Oliphant attempted to find a comfortable position; McNeile made this impossible, spinning one or another of several brass wheels. Do be still, McNeile said.

Oliphant closed his eyes. This fellow Pocklington, McNeile said.

I beg your pardon? Oliphant opened his eyes. McNeile stood above him, positioning a coil of iron on an adjustable armature.

Pocklington. He's attempting to take credit for the cessation of the Limehouse cholera.

The name isn't familiar A medical man?

Hardly. The fellow's a works-engineer. He claims to have ended the cholera by the simple expedient of removing the handle from a municipal water-pump! McNeile was screwing a braided copper cable in place.

I'm afraid I don't follow you.

Little wonder, sir! The man's either a fool or the worst sort of charlatan. He's written in the Times that the cholera is nothing more than the result of contaminated water.

Is that entirely unreasonable, do you think?

Utterly counter to enlightened medical theory. McNeile set to work with a second length of copper. This Pocklington, you see, is something of a favorite of Lord Babbage's. He was employed to remedy the ventilation troubles of the pneumatic trains.

Oliphant, detecting the envy in McNeile's tone, felt a slight and spiteful satisfaction. Babbage, speaking at Byron's state funeral, had regretted the fact that modern medicine remained more an art than a science. The speech, naturally, had been most widely published.

Do close your eyes, please, in the event of a spark being discharged. McNeile was pulling on a pair of great, stiff, leather gauntlets.

McNeile connected the copper cables to a massive voltaic cell. The room filled with the faint eerie odor of electricity.

Please try to relax, Mr. Oliphant, so as to facilitate the polar reversal!


Half-Moon Street was illuminated by a massive Webb lamp, a fluted Corinthian column fueled by sewer-gas. Like the rest of London's Webbs, it had remained unlit, during the summer's emergency, for fear of leaks and explosions. Indeed, there had been at least a dozen pavement-ripping blasts, most attributed to the same firedamp that powered the Webb. Lord Babbage was an outspoken supporter of the Webb method; as a result, every school-boy knew that the methane potential from a single cow was adequate for an average household's daily heating, lighting, and cooking requirements.

He glanced up at the lamp as he neared his own Georgian facade. Its light was another apparent token of returning normalcy, but he took little comfort in tokens. The physical and more crudely social cataclysm was past now, certainly, but Byron's death had triggered successive waves of instability; Oliphant imagined them spreading out like ripples in a pond, overlapping with others that spread from more obscure points of impact, creating ominously unpredictable areas of turbulence. One such, certainly, was the business of Charles Egremont and the current Luddite witch-hunt.

Oliphant knew with absolute professional certainty that the Luddites were defunct; despite the best efforts of a few manic anarchists, the London riots of the past summer had shown no coherent or organized political agenda. All reasonable aspirations of the working-class had been successfully subsumed by the Radicals. Byron, in his vigorous days, had tempered justice with a well-dramatized show of mercy. Those early Luddite leaders who had made their peace with the Rads were now the tidy, comfortably well-to-do leaders of respectable trades-unions and craft-guilds. Some were wealthy industrialists—though their peace of mind was severely perturbed by Egremont's systematic disinterment of old convictions.

A second wave of Luddism had arisen in the turbulent forties, aimed, this time, directly against the Rads, with a charter of popular rights and a desperate zest for violence. But it had crumbled in a welter of internecine treachery, and its boldest spirits, such as Walter Gerard, had met a distressingly public punishment. Today, such groups as the Manchester Hell-Cats, to which Michael Radley had belonged as a boy, were mere youth-gangs, quite devoid of political purpose. Captain Swing's influence might still be felt occasionally in rural Ireland, or even in Scotland, but Oliphant attributed this to the Rads' agricultural policies, which tended to lag behind their brilliance in industrial management.

No, he thought, as Bligh opened the door at his approach, the spirit of Ned Ludd was scarcely abroad in the land, but what was one to make of Egremont and his furious campaign?

Good evening, sir.

Good evening, Bligh. He gave Bligh his top-hat and umbrella.

Cook has a cold joint, sir.

Very good. I'll dine in the study, thank you.

Feeling well, sir?

Yes, thank you. Either McNeile's magnets or the devilishly uncomfortable manipulation table had set his back aching. McNeile had been recommended to him by Lady Brunel, Lord Brunel's spine being assumed to have suffered an inordinate amount of railway-shock in the course of his famous career. Dr. McNeile had recently diagnosed Oliphant's numinous spells, as he insisted on calling them, as symptoms of railway-spine, a condition in which the magnetic polarity of the patient's vertebrae was assumed to have been reversed by trauma. It was McNeile's thesis that this condition might be corrected by the application of electromagnetism, and to this end Oliphant now paid weekly visits to the Scot's Harley Street premises. McNeile's manipulations reminded Oliphant of his own father's unhealthily keen interest in mesmerism.

Oliphant senior, having served as Attorney-General of the Cape Colony, had subsequently been appointed Chief Justice of Ceylon. Consequently, Oliphant had received a private and necessarily rather fragmentary education, one to which he owed both his fluency in modern languages and his extraordinary ignorance of Greek and Latin. His parents had been Evangelicals of a markedly eccentric sort, and though he himself retained, however privately, certain aspects of their faith, he recalled with an odd dread his father's experiments iron wands, spheres of crystal

And how, he wondered, climbing the carpeted stairs, would Lady Brunel be adjusting to life as the Prime Minister's wife?

His Japanese wound began to throb as he gripped the banister.

Taking out a triple-splined Maudslay key from his waistcoat-pocket, he unlocked the door to his study. Bligh, who held the key's only duplicate, had lit the gas and banked the coals.

The study, paneled in oak, overlooked the park from a shallow triple-bay. An ancient refectory-table, quite plain, running very nearly the length of the room, served as Oliphant's desk. A very modern office-chair, mounted on glass-wheeled patent casters, regularly migrated around the table as Oliphant's work took him from one stack of folders to the next, then back again. The casters, in the chair's daily peregrinations, had begun to wear away the nap of the blue Axminster.

Three Colt & Maxwell receiving-telegraphs, domed in glass, dominated the end of the table nearest the window, their tapes coiling into wire baskets arranged on the carpet. There was a spring-driven transmitter as well, and an encrypting tape-cutter of recent Whitehall issue. The various cables for these devices, in tightly woven sleeves of burgundy silk, snaked up to a floral eyebolt suspended from the central lavalier, where they then swung to a polished brass plate, bearing the insignia of the Post Office, which was set into the wainscoting.

One of the receivers began immediately to hammer away. He walked the length of the table and read the message as it emerged from the machine's mahogany base.



VERY BUSY WITH PARTICULATE FOULING BUT YES DO VISIT STOP WAKEFIELD ENDIT


Bligh entered with a tray of sliced mutton and pickle. I've brought a bottle of ale, sir, he said, setting out linen and silverware on a section of the table kept cleared for this purpose.

Thank you, Bligh. Oliphant raised the tape of Wakefield's message with his fingertip, then let it droop back toward its wire basket.

Bligh poured the ale, then departed with his tray and the empty ceramic bottle. Oliphant trundled the office-chair around the table and sat down to spread his mutton with Branston pickle.

He was startled from his solitary meal by the clatter of one of his three receivers. He glanced down the table and saw the tape beginning to unspool in the machine to the right. The machine to the left, on which Wakefield's invitation to lunch had arrived, was on his personal number. Right meant police business of some kind, likely Betteredge, or Fraser. Putting down knife and fork, he rose.

He watched the message emerge from its brass slot.



RE F B YOU ARE REQUIRED AT ONCE STOP FRASER ENDIT


He took his father's German hunter from his waistcoat to note the time. Tucking it away, he touched the glass that domed the centermost of the three receiving-telegraphs. There had been no message on that one since the death of the late Prime Minister.


The address to which the cab earned him was in Brigsome's Terrace, off a thoroughfare of the sort that speculative builders delighted in carving through the ancient and still largely unexplored wilderness that was East London.

The terrace itself, Oliphant decided as he alighted from his hansom, was as dismal a block of buildings as had ever been composed of brick and mortar. The builder who had speculated on these ten dreary prison-houses, he thought, had likely hung himself behind the parlor door of some adjacent tavern before the hideous things were finished.

The streets through which the cab had conveyed him had been those one seemed to traverse at times such as these—all those thoroughfares seemingly unknown to day and the ordinary pedestrian. A thin rain was falling now, and Oliphant momentarily regretted not having accepted the water-proof that Bligh had offered at the door. The two men before No. 5 wore long drooping black cape-like articles of waxed Egyptian cotton. A recent innovation from New South Wales, Oliphant knew, much praised in the Crimea and precisely the thing for concealing weapons of the sort that these two most certainly concealed.

Special Bureau, Oliphant said, briskly climbing past the guards. Abashed by his accent and manner, they let him pass. It would be necessary to report that to Fraser.

He entered the house, finding himself in a parlor lit by a powerful carbide-lantern, atop a tripod, its merciless white glare magnified by a concave round of polished tin. The parlor was furnished with scraps salvaged from the ruins of gentility. There was a cottage-piano, and a chiffonier several sizes too large for the room. The latter struck him as pathetically gorgeous, with its tarnished gilt moldings. A threadbare patch of Brussels carpet swarmed with roses and lilies, amid a desert of colorless drugget. Knitted curtains shaded the windows overlooking Brigsome's Terrace. Beside the glass, two hanging wire baskets were festooned with plants of the cactus species, which grew in prickly and spider-like profusion.

Oliphant noted an acrid stench, more penetrating than the reek of carbide.

Betteredge emerged from the rear of the house. He wore a high-crowned derby hat that made him seem altogether American, so that he might easily have been mistaken for one of the Pinkerton operatives he shadowed daily. Likely the effect was deliberate, down to the patent boots with their elasticated side-gores. His expression, quite uncharacteristically, was one of grave anxiety. I'll take full responsibility, sir, he stammered. Something was very wrong. Mr. Fraser's waiting for you, sir. Nothing's been moved.

Oliphant allowed himself to be led through the doorway, and up a narrow, perilously steep flight of stairs. They emerged in a barren hallway, illuminated by a second carbide-lantern. Great spreading continents of niter marred the bare plaster walls. The burnt smell was stronger here.

Through another doorway, into yet brighter glare, and Fraser's dour face looking up from where he knelt beside a sprawled body. Fraser seemed about to speak; Oliphant silenced him with a gesture.

Here, then, was the source of the reek. Upon an old-fashioned coaching-case stood a compact modern Primus stove of the sort intended for camp, its brass fuel-canister gleaming bright as a mirror. Upon its ring rested a pannikin of black cast-iron. Whatever had been cooking in this vessel was now a charred and bitterly odorous residue.

He turned his attention to the corpse. The man had been a giant; in the small room, it was necessary to step over his outspread limbs. Oliphant bent to study the contorted features, the death-dulled eyes. He straightened, facing Fraser. And what do you make of this?

He was warming tinned beans, Fraser said. Eating them straight out of the pot there. With this. With the toe of his shoe, Fraser indicated a kitchen-spoon of chipped blue enamel. I'd say he was alone. I'd say he managed to choke down a good third of the tin before the poison felled him.

This poison, Oliphant said, taking his cigar-case and sterling cutter from his coat, what do you suppose it was? He extracted a cheroot, clipped and pierced it.

Something potent, Fraser said, by the look of him.

Yes, Oliphant agreed. Big chap.

Sir, Betteredge said, you'd best see this. He displayed a very long knife, sheathed in sweat-stained leather. A sort of harness dangled from the sheath. The weapon's handle was of dull horn, its hilt of brass. Betteredge drew the thing from its sheath. It was something on the order of a sailor's dirk, though single-edged, with a peculiar reverse curve at the tip.

What is that bit of brass along the top? Oliphant asked.

To parry another man's blade, Fraser said. Soft stuff. Catches the edge. American business.

Maker's mark?

No, sir, Betteredge said. Hand-forged by a smith, from the look of it.

Show him the pistol, Fraser said.

Betteredge sheathed the knife, set it atop the coaching-case. He produced a heavy revolver from beneath his coat. Franco-Mexican, he said, sounding remarkably like a salesman, Ballester-Molina; cocks itself automatically, after the first shot.

Oliphant raised an eyebrow. Military issue? The pistol was somewhat crude in appearance.

Cheap stuff, Fraser said, with a glance for Oliphant. For the American war trade, evidently. The Metropolitans have been confiscating them from sailors. Too many of them about.

Sailors?

Confederates, Yanks, Texians 

Texians, Oliphant said, and tasted the end of his unlit cheroot. I take it we agree in assuming our friend here is of that nationality?

He'd a sort of nest, in the garret, reached by a trapdoor. Betteredge was wrapping the pistol back into its oilcloth.

Terribly cold, I imagine?

Well, he'd blankets, sir.

The tin.

Sir?

The tin that contained the man's last meal, Betteredge.

No, sir. No tin.

Tidy, Oliphant said to Fraser. She waited for the poison to do its work, then returned, removing the evidence.

The surgeon will have our evidence out for us, never you fear, Fraser said.

Oliphant was overtaken by an abrupt nausea—at Eraser's manner, at the proximity of the corpse, at the pervading stink of burnt beans. He turned and stepped out into the hallway, where another of Eraser's men was adjusting the carbide-lantern.

What a foul house this was, in a foul street, harboring the foulest sort of business. A wave of loathing overtook him, a fierce hopeless detestation of the secret world, its midnight journeys, labyrinthine lies, its legions of the damned, the lost.

His hands were trembling as he struck a lucifer to light his cheroot.

Sir, the responsibility— Betteredge was at his elbow.

My friend at the corner of Chancery Lane hasn't given me such a good leaf as usual, Oliphant said, frowning at the tip of his cheroot. One must be very careful how one chooses one's cigars.

We've been over the place top-to-bottom, Mr. Oliphant. If she was living here, there's no trace of her.

Really? And to whom does that handsome chiffonier downstairs belong? Who waters the cacti? Does one water cacti? Perhaps they reminded our Texian friend of his homeland  He puffed resolutely on his cheroot and descended the stairs, with Betteredge on his heels like an anxious young setter.

A prim-looking sort from Criminal Anthropometry was lost in thought in front of the piano, as though trying to recall a tune. Of the various articles carried in this gentleman's black case, Oliphant knew, the least unpleasant were the calibrated linen tapes employed in taking Bertillon measurements of the skull.

Sir, Betteredge said, when the anthropometrist had moved upstairs, if you feel I was responsible, sir For losing her, I mean—

I believe, Betteredge, that I dispatched you earlier to a matinee, at the Garrick, to report on the acrobatic ladies of Manhattan, did I not?

Yes, sir 

You saw the Manhattan troupe, then?

Yes, sir.

But—do let me suppose—you saw her there, as well?

Yes, sir! And Mackerel and his two as well!

Oliphant removed his spectacles and polished them.

The acrobats, Betteredge? To attract such an audience they must have been quite remarkable.

Lord, sir, they batter one another with brickbats! The women run about in their dirty bare feet, and, well, scarves, sir, bits of gauze, no proper garments to speak of 

And you enjoyed yourself, Betteredge?

Quite honestly, sir, no. Like a panto in Bedlam, it was. And I'd the job of it, with the Pinkers there 

Mackerel was their name for the senior Pinkerton agent, a side-whiskered Philadelphian who most frequently presented himself as Beaufort Kingsley DeHaven, though sometimes as Beaumont Alexander Stokes. He was Mackerel by virtue of his seemingly invariable choice of breakfast, as reported by Betteredge and the other watchers.

Mackerel and two subordinates had been regular London fixtures for some eighteen months now, and Oliphant found them remarkably interesting, and a solid pretext for his own Government funding. The Pinkerton organization, while ostensibly a private firm, served as the central intelligence-gathering organ of the embattled United States. With networks in place throughout the Confederate States, as well as in the Republics of Texas and California, the Pinkertons were often privy to information of considerable strategic importance.

With the arrival in London of Mackerel and his cohorts, certain voices in Special Branch had argued for the various classic modes of coercion. Oliphant had quickly moved to quash this suggestion, arguing that the Americans would be of inestimably greater value if they were allowed to operate freely—under, he made it clear, the constant surveillance of both the Special Branch and his own Special Bureau of the Foreign Office. In practice, of course, the Special Bureau utterly lacked the manpower for any such undertaking, which had resulted in Special Branch assigning Betteredge to the task, along with a steady rota of nondescript Londoners, all of them experienced watchers, personally vetted by Oliphant. Betteredge reported directly to Oliphant, who assessed the raw material before passing it on to Special Branch. Oliphant found the arrangement thoroughly agreeable; Special Branch had so far refrained from comment.

The movements of the Pinkertons had gradually revealed minor but hitherto unsuspected sub-strata of clandestine activity. The resultant information constituted a rather mixed bag, but this was all the more to Oliphant's liking. The Pinkertons, he had happily declared to Betteredge, would provide the equivalent of geological core-samples. The Pinkertons would plumb the depths, and Britain would reap the benefits.

Betteredge, almost immediately and to his considerable pride, had discovered that one Mr. Fuller, the Texian legation's sole and woefully overworked clerk, was in Pinkerton pay. In addition, Mackerel had demonstrated a profound curiosity about the affairs of General Sam Houston, going so far as to personally burglarize the country estate of the exiled Texian President. Some months subsequently, the Pinkertons had shadowed Michael Radley, Houston's flack, whose murder in Grand's Hotel had led directly to a number of Oliphant's current lines of inquiry.

And you saw our Mrs. Bartlett, attending the Communard performance? You're entirely positive?

No question, sir!

Mackerel and company were aware of her? She of them?

No, sir—they were watching the Communard panto, hooting and jeering. Mrs. Bartlett crept back-stage between acts! She kept well in the rear, afterwards. Applauding, though. Betteredge frowned.

The Pinkertons made no attempt to follow Mrs. Bartlett?

No, sir!

But you did.

Yes, sir. When the show was done, I left Boots and Becky Dean to ghost our chaps, and set out to dog her alone.

You were very foolish, Betteredge. Oliphant's tone was exceptionally mild. You should rather have dispatched Boots and Becky. They're far more experienced, and a team is invariably more efficient than a single watcher. You might easily have lost her.

Betteredge winced.

Or she might have killed you, Betteredge. She's a murderess. Quite appallingly accomplished. Known to conceal vitriol about her person.

Sir, I take full—

No, Betteredge, no. None of it. She'd already killed our Texian Goliath. Highly premeditated, no doubt. She was in a position to provide him food, aiding and abetting him, just as she and her friends did, during that night of terror at Grand's Hotel She'd bring him round his tinned beans, you see. He depended on her; he'd gone to ground in a garret. Simply a matter of doctoring a tin.

But why should she turn on him now, sir?

A question of loyalties, Betteredge. Our Texian was a nationalist zealot. Patriots may league with the very devil in pursuit of a nation's interest, but there are matters at which they balk. Likely she demanded some deadly service from him, and he refused. He knew as much from the confession of Collins; the nameless Texian had been a fractious ally. The fellow crossed her, spurned her schemes; as did the late Professor Rudwick. So he met the same fate as the man he killed.

She must be desperate.

Perhaps But we have no reason to believe you alerted her by following her here.

Betteredge blinked. Sir, when you sent me to see the Communards, did you suspect she might be there?

Not at all. I confess, Betteredge, I was indulging a whim. Lord Engels, an acquaintance of mine, is fascinated by this fellow Marx, the Commune's founder 

Engels the textile magnate?

Yes. He's quite eccentric about it, actually.

About those Communard women, sir?

About Mr. Marx's theories in general, and the fate of the Manhattan Commune in particular. Friedrich's generosity, in fact, made this current tour possible.

The richest man in Manchester, funding that sort of tripe? Betteredge seemed genuinely disturbed by the revelation.

Peculiar, yes. Friedrich is himself the son of a wealthy Rhineland industrialist In any case, I was curious for your report. And, of course, I did rather expect our Mr. Mackerel to put in an appearance. The United States take the dimmest possible view of the Red revolution in Manhattan.

One of the women gave a sort of, well, sermon, sir, before the panto, and ranted like sixty! Some business about 'iron laws'—

 'The iron law of history,' yes. All very doctrinaire. But Marx has borrowed much of his theory from Lord Babbage—so much so, that his doctrine may one day dominate America. Oliphant's nausea had passed. But consider, Betteredge, that the Commune was founded during city-wide anti-war riots, protesting the Union conscription. Marx and his followers seized power during a period of chaos, somewhat akin to last summer's affliction in London. Here, of course, we've come through in good form, and that in spite of having lost our Great Orator in the very midst of the emergency. Proper succession of power is everything, Betteredge.

Yes, sir. Betteredge nodded, distracted from the matter of Lord Engel's Communard sympathies by Oliphant's patriotic sentiments. Oliphant, suppressing a sigh, rather wished that he himself believed them.


Oliphant nodded and napped, on the journey home. He dreamed, as he often did, of an omniscient Eye in whose infinite perspectives might be sorted every least mystery.

Upon arrival, he found, to his ill-concealed chagrin, that Bligh had drawn a bath for him in the collapsible rubber tub recently prescribed by Dr. McNeile. In robe and nightshirt, slippered in embroidered moleskin, Oliphant examined the thing with resigned distaste. It stood, steaming, before the perfectly good and perfectly empty tub of white porcelain which dominated his bath-room. It was Swiss, the rubber bath, its slack black trough gone taut and bulbous with the volume of water it presently contained. Supported by an elaborately hinged frame of black-enameled teak, it was connected to the geyser with a worm-like hose and several ceramic petcocks.

Removing his robe, and then his nightshirt, he stepped from his slippers, then from the chill of octagonal marble tiles, into the soft, warm maw. It very nearly overturned as he struggled to sit. The elastic material, supported on all sides by the frame, gave distressingly beneath one's feet. And was, he discovered, quite horrid in its embrace of one's buttocks. He was, according to McNeile's prescription, to recline for a quarter-hour, his head supported on the small pneumatic pillow of rubberized canvas supplied for this purpose by the manufacturer. McNeile maintained that the cast-iron body of a porcelain tub confused the spine's natural attempts to return to its correct magnetic polarity. Oliphant shifted slightly, grimacing at the obscene sensation of the clinging rubber.

Bligh had arranged a sponge, pumice, and a fresh bar of French-milled soap in the little bamboo basket attached to the side of the tub. Bamboo, Oliphant supposed, must also lack magnetic properties.

He groaned, then took up sponge and soap and began to wash himself.

Released from the pressing business of the day, Oliphant, as he often did, undertook a detailed and systematic act of recollection. He had a natural gift for memory, greatly aided in youth by the educational doctrines of his father, whose ardent interest in mesmerism and the tricks of stage-magic had introduced his son to the arcane disciplines of mnemonics. Such accomplishments had been of great use to Oliphant in later life, and he practiced them now with a regularity he had once devoted to prayer.

Almost a year had passed since his search through the effects of Michael Radley, in Room 37, Grand's Hotel.

Radley had owned a modern steamer-trunk of the sort that, upended and opened, served as a compact combination of wardrobe and bureau. This, along with a scuffed leather hat-case and a brass-framed Jacquard satchel, constituted the whole of the publicist's luggage. Oliphant had found the intricacy of the trunk's fittings depressing. All these hinges, runners, hooks, nickeled catches, and leather tabs—they spoke of a dead man's anticipation of journeys that were never to be. Equally pathetic were the three gross of fancily stippled cartes-de-viste, with Radley's Manchester telegraph-number arranged in the French manner, still wrapped in printer's-tissue.

He began by unpacking each section in turn, laying Radley's clothing out on the hotel bed with a valet's precision. The publicist had entertained a fondness for silk nightshirts. As he worked, Oliphant examined maker's labels and laundry-marks, turning out pockets and running his fingers over seams and linings.

Radley's toilet articles were secured in a removable envelope of water-proofed silk.

Oliphant examined the contents, handling each object in turn a badger shaving-brush, a self-stropping safety-razor, a toothbrush, a tin of tooth-powder, a sponge-bag He rapped the ivory handle of the brush against the foot of the bedstead. He opened the razor's leatherette case nickel-plate gleamed against a bed of violet velour. He emptied the toothpowder out on a sheet of Grand's engraved stationery. He looked in the sponge-bag—and found a sponge.

The glitter of the razor drew his eye. Dumping its various components atop the starched bib of an evening-shirt, he used the penknife on his watch-chain to pry the fitted velour nest from the case. It came away easily, revealing a tightly folded sheet of foolscap.

Upon this sheet, in pencil, quite smudged with frequent erasure and re-erasure, was written what appeared to be the start of a draft letter. Undated, lacking any term of address, it was unsigned



I trust you recall our two Conversations of th past Aug, during and of which you so kindly entrusted me w yr Conjectures. I am pleased to inform you that cert manipulations have yielded a version—a true vers of yr orig—which I feel most confidently can at last be run, thereby demonstrating that Proof so long sought & expected.


The remainder of the sheet was blank, with the exception of three faintly penciled rectangles, containing the Roman capitals ALG, COMP, and MOD.

ALG, COMP, and MOD had subsequently become a fabulous three-headed beast, frequent visitor to the higher fields of Oliphant's imagination. His discovery of the probable meaning of this cipher, while examining transcripts of the interrogation of William Collins, had failed to dispel the image; Alg-Comp-Mod was with him still, a serpent-necked chimera, its heads nastily human. Radley's face was there, quite dead, mouth agape, eyes blank as fog, and the cool marble features of Lady Ada Byron, aloof and impassive, framed by curls and ringlets that were proofs of a pure geometry. But the third head, sinuously swaying, evaded Oliphant's gaze. He sometimes imagined its face was Edward Mallory's, resolutely ambitious, hopelessly frank; at other times he took it to be the pretty, poisonous visage of Florence Bartlett, wreathed in fumes of vitriol.

And sometimes, particularly as now, in the rubber bath's cloying embrace, drifting toward the continent of sleep, the face was his own, its eyes filled with a dread he could not name.


The following morning, Oliphant slept in, then kept to his bed, Bligh supplying him with files from the study, strong tea, and anchovy toast. He read a Foreign Office dossier on one Wilhelm Stieber, a Prussian agent posing as an emigre newspaper editor named Schmidt. With considerably more interest, he read and annotated a Bow Street file detailing several recent attempts to smuggle munitions, each incident involving cargo destined for Manhattan. The next file consisted of Engine-printed copies of several letters from a Mr. Copeland, of Boston. Mr. Copeland, who traveled in lumber, was in British pay. His letters described the system of forts defending the island of Manhattan, with extensive notes on ordnance. Oliphant's gaze, from long practice, slid lightly over Copeland's account of the south battery on Governor's Island, something of a relic by the sound of it, and quickly arrived at a report of rumors that the Commune had strung a chain of mines from the Romer Shoals to the Narrows.

Oliphant sighed. He very much doubted that the channel had been mined, but the leaders of the Commune would certainly wish it to be thought to have been mined. As indeed it might soon be, if the gentlemen of the Commission for Free Trade were to have their way.

Bligh was at the door.

You've an appointment with Mr. Wakefield, sir, at the Central Statistics Bureau.

An hour later, Betteredge greeted him from the open door of a cab. Good afternoon, Mr. Oliphant. Oliphant climbed in and settled himself. Pleated shades of black-proofed canvas were drawn firmly across either window, shutting out Half-Moon Street and the stark November sun. As the driver urged the cab-horse forward, Betteredge opened a case at his feet, took out a lamp, which he lit in a rapid and dextrous fashion, and fixed, with a brass apparatus of screws and bolts, to the arm of the seat. The interior of the case glittered like a miniature arsenal. He passed Oliphant a crimson file-folder.

Oliphant opened the file, which detailed the circumstances of the death of Michael Radley.

He had himself been in the smoking-room with the General and poor doomed Radley, the both of them awash with drink. Of their respective styles of drunkenness, Radley's had been the more presentable, the least predictable, the more dangerous. Houston, in his cups, delighted in playing the barbarous American; red-eyed, perspiring, foul-mouthed, he lounged with one great coarse boot propped muddily atop an ottoman. As Houston spoke, and smoked, and spat, roundly cursing Oliphant and Britain, he sullenly shaved curls from a bit of pine, periodically pausing to strop the jack-knife on the edge of his boot-sole. Radley, in contrast, had positively quivered with the liquor's stimulant effect, cheeks flushed and eyes flashing.

Oliphant's visit had been intended deliberately to disturb Houston on the eve of his departure to France, but the display of ill-concealed mutual hostility evident between the General and his publicist had been quite unexpected.

He had hoped to sow seeds of doubt with regard to the French tour; to this end, and primarily for Radley's benefit, he had managed to imply an exaggerated degree of cooperation on the parts of the intelligence services of Britain and France. Oliphant had suggested that Houston already possessed at least one powerful enemy among the Police des Chateaux, the bodyguard and secret personal agency of the Emperor Napoleon. While the Police des Chateaux were few in number, Oliphant insinuated, they were utterly without legal or constitutional restraint; Radley, at least, in spite of his condition, had obviously taken note of the implied threat.

They had been interrupted by a page, who brought a note for Radley. As the door opened to admit the man, Oliphant had glimpsed the anxious face of a young woman. Radley had stated, as he excused himself, that it was necessary that he speak briefly with a journalistic contact.

Radley had returned to the smoking-room some ten minutes later. Oliphant then took his leave, having endured an extended and particularly florid tirade from the General, who had consumed the better part of a pint of brandy during Radley's absence.

Summoned back to Grand's by telegram in the early hours of dawn, Oliphant had immediately sought out the hotel-detective, a retired Metropolitan named McQueen, who had been called to Houston's room, number 24, by the desk clerk, Mr. Parkes.

While Parkes attempted to calm the hysterical wife of a Lancashire paving-contractor, resident in number 25 at the time of the disturbance, McQueen had tried the knob of Houston's door, discovering it to be unlocked. Snow was blowing in through the demolished window, and the air, already chilled, stank of burnt gunpowder, blood, and, as McQueen delicately put it, the contents of the late gentleman's bowel. Spying the scarlet ruin that was Radley's corpse, all too visible in the cold light of dawn, McQueen had called to Parkes to telegraph the Metropolitans. He then used his passkey to lock the door, lit a lamp, and blocked the view from the street with the remains of one of the window-curtains.

The condition of Radley's clothing indicated that the pockets had been gone through. Sundry personal objects lay in the pool of blood and other matter surrounding the corpse a repeating match, a cigar-case, coins of various denominations. Lamp in hand, the detective surveyed the room, discovering an ivory-handled Leacock & Hutchings pocket-pistol. The weapon's trigger was missing. Three of its five barrels had been discharged—very recently, McQueen judged. Continuing his search, he had discovered the gaudy gilded head of General Houston's stick, awash in splintered glass. Nearby lay a bloodied packet, tightly wrapped in brown paper. It proved to contain a hundred kinotrope-cards, their intricate fretting of punch-holes ruined by the passage of a pair of bullets. The bullets themselves, of soft lead and much distorted, fell into McQueen's palm as he examined the cards.

Subsequent examination of the room by specialists from Central Statistics—the attention of the Metropolitan Police, at Oliphant's request, having been swiftly deflected from the matter—added little to what the veteran McQueen had observed. The trigger of the Leacock & Hutchings pepperbox was recovered from beneath an armchair. A more peculiar discovery consisted of a square-cut white diamond, of fifteen carats and very high quality, which was found firmly wedged between two floor-boards.

Two men from Criminal Anthropometry, no more than usually cryptic about their purposes, employed large squares of tissue-thin adhesive grid-paper to capture various hairs and bits of fluff from the carpet; they guarded these specimens jealously, and took them away promptly, and nothing was ever heard of them again.

Are you done with that one, sir?

He looked up at Betteredge, then down at the file, seeing Radley's blood spread in a tacky pool.

We're in Horseferry Road, sir.

The cab came to a halt.

Yes, thank you. He closed the file and handed it to Betteredge. He descended from the cab and mounted the broad stairs.

Regardless of the circumstances surrounding a given visit, he invariably felt a peculiar quickening upon entering the Central Statistics Bureau. He felt it now, certainly a sense of being observed, somehow—of being known and numbered. The Eye, yes

As he spoke to the uniformed clerk at the visitor's-desk, a gang of journeymen mechanics emerged from a hallway to his left. They wore Engine-cut woolen jackets and polished brogues soled with creped rubber. Each man earned a spotless tool-satchel of thick white duck, cornered with bronze rivets and brown hide. As they moved toward him, conversing among themselves, some drew pipes and cheroots from their pockets in anticipation of a shift's-end smoke.

Oliphant experienced a sharp pang of tobacco-hunger. He had often had call to regret the Bureau's necessary policy regarding tobacco. He looked after the mechanics as they passed, out between the columns and the bronze sphinxes. Married men, assured of a Bureau pension, they would live in Camden Town, in New Cross, in any respectable suburb, and would furnish their tiny sitting-rooms with papier-mache side-boards and ornate Dutch clocks. Their wives would serve tea on gaudily japanned tin trays.

Passing an irritatingly banal quasi-biblical bas-relief, he made his way to the lift. As the attendant bowed him in, he was joined by a glum gentleman who was daubing with a handkerchief at a pale streak on the shoulder of his coat.

The articulated bars of the brass cage rattled shut. The lift ascended. The gentleman with the soiled coat made his exit at the third stop. Oliphant rode on to the fifth, the home of Quantitative Criminology and Non-Linear Analysis. While he found the latter infinitely more compelling than the former, it was Q C he needed today, most particularly in the person of Andrew Wakefield, the departmental Under-Secretary.

The clerks of Q C were individually walled into neatly cramped cells of rolled-steel, asbestos, and veneer. Wakefield presided over them from a grander version of the same scheme, his sparse sandy head framed by the brass-fitted drawers of a multitude of card-files.

He glanced up as Oliphant approached, prominent front teeth displayed against his lower lip. Mr. Oliphant, sir, he said. A pleasure as ever. Pardon me. He shuffled a number of punch-cards into a sturdy blue envelope lined with tissue-paper, and meticulously wound the little scarlet string about the two halves of the patent-clasp. He set the envelope aside, in an asbestos-lined hutch containing several other envelopes of identical hue.

Oliphant smiled. Fancy I can read your punch-holes, Andrew? He levered a spring-loaded stenographer's-chair up from its ingenious housing and took a seat, his furled umbrella balanced across his knees.

Know what a blue envelope's about, do you? Springs clanged as Wakefield folded his articulated writing-desk into its narrow slot.

Not a specific one, no, but I rather imagine that's the trick of it.

There are men who can read cards, Oliphant. But even a junior clerk can read the directive primaries as easily as you read the kinos in the underground.

I never read the kinos in the underground, Andrew.

Wakefield snorted. Oliphant knew this to be his equivalent of laughter. And how are things among the corps diplomatique, Mr. Oliphant? Coping with our 'Luddite conspiracy,' are we? It would have been impossible to mistake the man's sarcasm, but Oliphant pretended to take him quite literally.

It really hasn't had too great an effect, as yet. Not among my own areas of special interest.

Wakefield nodded, assuming that Oliphant's areas of special interest were limited to the activities of foreign nationals on British soil. On Oliphant's request, Wakefield regularly ordered the files spun on groups as diverse as the Carbonari, the Knights of the White Camellia, the Fenian Society, the Texas Rangers, the Greek Hetairai, the Pinkerton Detective Agency, and the Confederate Bureau of Scientific Research, all of whom were known to be operative in Britain.

I trust that the Texian material we provided has been of some use? Wakefield inquired, coil-springs creaking behind him as he leaned forward.

Quite, Oliphant assured him.

You wouldn't know, Wakefield began, taking a gold-plated propelling-pencil from his pocket, if their legation intends a change of premises? He tapped the pencil against his front teeth, producing a loud clicking sound that Oliphant found repulsive.

From their present location in St. James's? 'Round from Berry's the wine-merchant?

Precisely.

Oliphant hesitated, seeming to weigh the matter. I shouldn't think so. They haven't any money. I suppose it would depend upon the good-will of the landlord, finally 

Wakefield smiled, his teeth dimpling his lower-lip.

Wakefield, Oliphant said, do tell me—who wishes to know?

Criminal Anthropometry.

Really? Are they involved in surveillant activities?

I gather it's technical, actually. Experimental. Wakefield put his pencil away. Your savant chap—Mallory, was it?

Yes?

Saw a review of his book. Off to China, is he?

Mongolia. Heading up an expedition for the Geographical Society.

Wakefield pursed his lips and nodded. Out from underfoot, I should think.

Out of harm's way, one should hope. Not a bad sort, really. Seemed to keenly appreciate the technical aspects of your Bureau's work. But I've a technical matter for you myself, Andrew.

Really? Wakefield's springs creaked.

Having to do with Post Office procedure.

Wakefield made a small, entirely noncommittal sound in his throat.

Oliphant took an envelope from his pocket and passed it to the Under-Secretary. It was unsealed. Wakefield took a pair of white cotton gloves from a wire basket at his elbow, drew them on, extracted a white telegraphic address-card from the envelope, glanced at it, then met Oliphant's gaze.

Grand's Hotel, Wakefield said.

Quite. The establishment's crest was printed on the card. Oliphant watched as Wakefield automatically ran a gloved fingertip across the lines of punch-holes, checking for indications of wear that might cause mechanical difficulties.

You wish to know who sent it?

That information is in my possession, thank you.

Name of addressee?

I am aware of that as well.

The springs creaked—nervously, it seemed to Oliphant. Wakefield rose, with a twanging of steel, and carefully inserted the card in a brass slot set into the face of a glass-fronted instrument which overhung a bank of card-files. With a glance at Oliphant, he reached up a gloved hand and cranked down an ebony-handled lever. On the down-stroke, the device thumped like a shopman's credit-press. As Wakefield released the lever, it began to slowly right itself, humming and clicking like a publican's wagering-machine. Wakefield watched as the whirling character-wheels ticked and slowed. Abruptly, the device was silent.

Egremont, Wakefield read aloud, but quietly,  'The Beeches,' Belgravia.

Indeed. Oliphant watched as Wakefield extracted the card from the brass slot. I require the text of that telegram, Andrew.

Egremont, Wakefield said, as though he hadn't heard. He took his seat again, replaced the card in its envelope, and removed his gloves. He seems to be everywhere, our Right Honorable Charles Egremont. No end of work he's making for us here, Oliphant.

The text of the message, Andrew, is here in the Bureau. It exists physically, I believe, as however many inches of telegrapher's tape.

Do you know I've fifty-five miles' gear-yardage under me, still fouled from the Stink? Aside from the fact that your request is rather more than usually irregular

 'Usually irregular'? That's rather good 

And your friends from the Special Branch trooping in hourly, demanding that our brass be spun and spun again, in hope of shaking loose these Luddites alleged to be lodged in the nation's rafters! Who is this bloody man, Oliphant?

A rather junior Rad politician, I understand. Or was, till the Stink and the resulting disorders.

Till Byron's death, rather.

But we've Lord Brunel now, haven't we?

Indeed, and bloody madness under him in Parliament!

Oliphant let the silence lengthen. If you could obtain the text of the telegram, Andrew, he said at last, very quietly, I should be very grateful.

He's a very ambitious man, Oliphant. With ambitious friends.

You are not alone in that assessment.

Wakefield sighed. Under the circumstances, extreme discretion—

By all means!

Aside from which our yardage is filthy. Condensed particulate matter. We're working the mechanics on triple-shifts, and having some success with Lord Colgate's aerosol applications, but I sometimes despair of ever having the system properly up and spinning! He lowered his voice. Do you know that the finer functions of the Napoleon have been unreliable for months?

The Emperor? Oliphant pretended to misunderstand.

The Napoleon's gear-yardage, in equivalent terms, is very nearly double ours, Wakefield said. And it simply isn't functioning! The thought seemed to fill him with a special horror.

Had a Stink of their own, have they?

Wakefield grimly shook his head.

There you are, then, said Oliphant, most likely the gears are jammed on a bit of onion-skin 

Wakefield snorted.

Do find me that telegram? At your earliest convenience, of course.

Wakefield inclined his head, but only very slightly.

Good fellow, Oliphant declared. He saluted the Under-Secretary with his furled umbrella and rose, to retrace his steps through Q C's cubbies and the bowed and patient heads of Wakefield's clerks.


Oliphant had made his professionally circuitous way to Dean Street from the Soho tavern where he had instructed Betteredge to deposit him. Now he entered a soot-streaked house, its door unlatched. Latching it carefully behind him, he climbed two flights of uncarpeted stairs. The chill air smelled of cooked cabbage and stale tobacco.

He rapped twice at a door, then twice again.

Come in, come in, you'll let in the cold  The heavily bearded Mr. Hermann Kriege, late of the New York Volks Tribune, appeared to be wearing every article of clothing he possessed, as though he had wagered that he could all at once don the entire contents of a ragman's barrow.

He locked and chained the door behind Oliphant.

Kriege had two rooms, the one with the view of the street being the drawing-room, and behind it a bedroom. Everything broken and tattered, and in the greatest disorder. A large, old-fashioned table, covered with wax-cloth, stood in the middle of the drawing-room. On it lay manuscripts, books, newspapers, a doll with a Dresden head, bits and pieces of a woman's sewing things, chipped teacups, dirty spoons, pens, knives, candlesticks, an inkpot. Dutch clay pipes, tobacco-ash.

Sit, sit, please. More ursine than ever in his bundled attire, Kriege waved vaguely toward a chair with only three legs. Blinking through a haze of coal– and tobacco-smoke, Oliphant made out a chair that seemed whole, though Kriege's daughter had been playing kitchen on it. Choosing to risk a pair of trousers, Oliphant swept jammy crumbs aside and sat, facing Kriege across the sad domestic litter of the crowded table-top.

A small gift for your little Traudl, Oliphant said, taking a tissue-wrapped parcel from his coat. The tissue was secured with a self-adhesive rectangle, embossed with the initials of an Oxford Street toy-emporium. A doll's tea things. He placed the parcel on the table.

She calls you 'Uncle Larry.' She shouldn't know your name.

Many's the Larry about Soho, I should imagine. Oliphant produced a plain envelope, unsealed, and placed it beside the parcel, precisely aligned with the table's edge. It contained three well-circulated five-pound notes.

Kriege said nothing. A silence lengthened.

The Manhattan Women's Red Pantomime Troupe, Oliphant said at last.

Kriege snorted derisively. The Bowery's Sapphic best, come to London? I remember them in Purdy's National. They wooed and won the Dead Rabbits to the cause, whose sole previous involvement with politics had consisted of rock-fights and punch-ups in municipal elections. The butcher-boys, the bootblacks, the prostitutes of Chatham Square and the Five Points, that was their audience. Sweaty proletarians, come to see a woman shot out of a gun, flattened against a wall, and peeled off like paper I tell you, sir, your interest is misplaced.

Oliphant sighed. My friend, it is my job to ask questions. You must understand that I cannot tell you my reasons for asking a given question. I know that you have suffered. I know that you suffer now, in exile. Oliphant glanced meaningfully about the tragic room.

What then do you wish to know?

It has been suggested that among the various criminal elements, active during the recent civil disruptions, were agents of Manhattan. Oliphant waited.

I find that unlikely.

On what basis, Mr. Kriege?

To my knowledge, the Commune has no interest in disturbing the British status-quo. Your Rads have shown themselves to be benevolent bystanders, with regard to America's class-struggle. Indeed, your nation has behaved as an ally of sorts. There was much bitterness in Kriege's tone, a curdled cynicism. One imagines it was in Britain's own interest to see the Northern Union lose its greatest city to the Communards.

Oliphant shifted cautiously on the uncomfortable chair. You knew Mr. Marx intimately, I believe. In order to extract a given piece of information from Kriege, he knew, it was necessary to engage the man's dominant passion.

Knew him? I was there to greet him off the boat. He embraced me, and not a minute later had borrowed twenty gold dollars, to pay his rent in the Bronx! Kriege assayed a sort of laugh, strangled with abiding rage. He'd his Jenny with him, then, though the marriage didn't survive the revolution But he'd a Brooklyn Irish factory-girl in his bed when he expelled me from the Commune, sir, for preaching 'religionism and free-love'! Free-love indeed! Kriege's large pale hands, with their unkept nails, plucked abstractedly at a sheaf of papers.

You have been badly used, Mr. Kriege. Oliphant thought of his friend. Lord Engels; it did seem extraordinary, that the brilliant textile-manufacturer should involve himself, however distantly, with people of this sort. Kriege had been a member of the Commune's so-called Central Committee, before Marx had sent him packing. With a price on his head in the Northern Union, he had sailed in steerage from Boston, penniless, under an assumed name, with his wife and child, to join London's thousands of American refugees.

These Bowery pantomimes

Yes? Oliphant leaned forward.

There are factions within the Party

Do go on.

Anarchists disguising themselves as communists; feminists, all manner of incorrect ideologies, you see, covert cells not under Manhattan's control

I see, Oliphant said, thinking of the reams of yellow fan-fold representing the confession of William Collins.


Again on foot, Oliphant made his roundabout way through Soho, to Compton Street, where he paused before the entrance of a public house known as the Blue Boar.

A SPORTING-GENTLEMAN, he was informed by a large bill, a Staunch Supporter of the destruction of these Vermin, would give A GOLD REPEATER-WATCH TO BE KILLED FOR BY DOGS under 13 3/4 pounds weight. Below the smudged bill, a painted wooden placard advertised Rats always on hand for the accommodation of Gentlemen to try their dogs.

He entered, and shortly was greeting Fraser in the rank smell of dogs, tobacco-smoke, and hot penny-gin.

The long bar was crowded with men of every grade of society, many with their animals under their arms. There were bull-dogs, Skye terriers, small brown English terriers. The room was low-ceilinged and quite unadorned. About the walls were hung clusters of leather collars.

You came by cab, sir? Fraser inquired.

On foot, from a previous appointment.

 'Ere now, cried the barman, don't block up the bar! There was a general movement toward the parlor, where a young waiter now shouted, Give your orders, gentlemen! With Fraser at his side, Oliphant followed the crowd of sporting-men and their dogs. Above the parlor fireplace were glass-fronted cases displaying the stuffed heads of animals famous in their day. Oliphant noticed the head of a bullterrier, its glass eyes bulging hugely.

Looks as though this one died of strangulation, Oliphant remarked, pointing the thing out to Fraser.

They've spoilt her in the stuffing, sir, said the waiter, a fair-haired boy in a greasy striped apron. Good as any in England, she was. I've seen her kill twenty at a go, though they killed her at the last. Your sewer-rats are dreadful for giving a dog canker, though we'd always rinse her mouth out well with peppermint and water.

You're Sayers' boy, Fraser said. We want a word with him.

Why, I know you, sir! You were 'ere about that savantry gent—

Your old dad, Jem, and brisk about it, Fraser interjected, preventing the boy from announcing the arrival of a copper to the assembled sportsmen.

 'E's upstairs lighting the pit, sir, the boy said.

Good chap, Oliphant said, giving the boy a shilling.

Oliphant and Fraser mounted a broad wooden staircase, which led to what had once been the drawing-room. Opening a door, Fraser led the way into the rat-killing apartment.

Pit's not bloody open, bellowed a fat man with ginger side-whiskers. Oliphant saw that the pit consisted of a wooden circus, some six feet in diameter, fitted with a high rim at elbow-height. Above it branched the arms of an eight-mantle gas-light, brightly illuminating the white-painted floor of the little arena. Mr. Sayers, the Blue Boar's proprietor, in a bulging silk waistcoat, stood with a live rat in his left hand. But it's you, Mr. Fraser. My apologies, sir! Having caught the creature somehow by the throat, he deftly prized out its larger teeth with no more implement than his strong thumbnail. Order for a dozen with their teeth drawed. He dropped the mutilated rat into a rusted wire cage with several others and turned to face his visitors.  'Ow might we be of service, Mr. Fraser?

Fraser took out an Engine-stippled morgue-portrait.

Aye, 'e's your man, Sayers said, his brows rising. Big chap, long in the leg. And a dead'un, by the look of 'im.

You're quite positive? Oliphant could smell the rats now. This is Professor Rudwick's murderer?

Aye, sir. We gets all sorts 'ere, but none too many Argentine giants. I recall 'im quite plain.

Fraser had taken out his notebook and was writing in it.

Argentine? Oliphant asked.

 'E spoke Spanish, Sayers said, or so I took it to be. Now mind you, we none o' us saw 'im do the deed, but 'e was on the premises that night, so 'e was.

Cap'an's here, Sayers' son called from the doorway.

 'Ell! And I've not drawed the teeth of 'alf 'is rats!

Fraser, Oliphant said, I fancy a warm gin. Let us retire to the bar and allow Mr. Sayers to complete arrangements for the evening's sport. He bent to examine a larger cage, this one of iron bands. It seemed to contain a solid mound of rats.

Mind your fingers there, Sayers said. For believe me, you get a bite and you'll not forget it. These 'ere are none o' the cleanest 

In the parlor, a young officer, evidently the Captain, was threatening to leave the place if he were kept waiting any longer.

I shouldn't drink that if I were you, Fraser said, looking at Oliphant's noggin of warm gin. Almost certainly adulterated.

Actually it's quite good, Oliphant said. It has a very faint after-taste, rather like bitter wormwood.

An intoxicant poison.

Quite. The French use it in the preparation of herbals. What do you make of our good Captain here? Oliphant gestured with his gin, indicating the man in question, who was pacing about in an agitated fashion, examining the paws of various animals as their owners presented them, all the while shouting that he should depart immediately if the pit weren't opened.

Crimea, Fraser said.

The Captain bent to peer at the claws of a young terrier in the arms of a swarthy, rather portly man whose pomaded spit-curls protruded like wings from beneath his high-crowned derby.

Velasco, Fraser said, as if to himself, something nastily akin to pleasure in his tone, and was instantly beside the fellow.

The Captain started, his handsome young face convulsed with a violent tic, and Oliphant's eye abruptly filled with all the red Crimea—whole cities aflame like bonfires, and shell-churned wastes of jellied filth sprouting white flowers that were men's hands. He shuddered with the intensity of the vision, then forgot it utterly.

Do I know you, sir? the Captain inquired of Fraser, with a brittle murderous jollity.

Gentlemen! Mr. Sayers cried from the stairs. Led by the Captain, the entire company, save only Oliphant, Fraser, the swarthy man, and a fourth man, made for the pit above. The fourth man, perched on the arm of a ragged brocade armchair, began to cough. Oliphant saw Eraser's grip tighten about his prey's upper arm.

Shouldn't bloody ought to do that, Fraser, the man on the chair-arm said, unfolding his legs and standing. Oliphant noted a certain calculation evident in his tone. Like the swarthy man, he was newly and nattily kitted out, all in Oxford Street's latest, his coat of Engine-cut gabardine dyed a blue that verged on lavender. Oliphant saw that his lapel, like that of his companion, was decorated with a gleaming cloisonne badge in the shape of the Union Jack.

 'Bloody,' Mr. Tate? Fraser said, a schoolmaster about to deliver a tongue-lashing or worse.

Fair warning, Fraser, the swarthy man said, his dark eyes protruding. We're about Parliamentary business! The little brown terrier shivered in his arms.

Are you, then? Oliphant inquired mildly, and what business has Parliament in a rat-pit?

Might ask the same of you, eh? the taller man said insolently, then coughed. Fraser glared at him.

Fraser, Oliphant said, are these gentlemen the confidential agents you mentioned in regard to Dr. Mallory?

Tate and Velasco, Fraser said grimly.

Mr. Tate, Oliphant said, stepping forward, a pleasure, sir. I am Laurence Oliphant, journalist. Tate blinked, confused by Oliphant's cordiality. Fraser, rather reluctantly taking Oliphant's cue, released Velasco's arm. Mr. Velasco. Oliphant smiled.

Velasco's face clouded with suspicion. Journalist? What sort of journalist? he demanded, glancing from Oliphant to Fraser and back.

Travel pieces, primarily, Oliphant said, though I'm currently engaged, with Mr. Fraser's able help, in compiling a popular history of the Great Stink.

Tate peered narrowly at Oliphant. Mallory, you said. What about 'im?

I interviewed Dr. Mallory prior to his departure for China. His experiences during the Stink were most remarkable, and highly illustrative of the perils that might befall anyone during such a chaotic period.

 'Befall anyone'? Velasco challenged. Rubbish! Mallory's trouble was savantry trouble and your Mr. Fraser knows it well enough!

Yes, yes, quite, Oliphant agreed. And that is why I am delighted to have encountered you gentlemen tonight.

Velasco and Tate glanced uncertainly at one another. You are? Tate ventured.

Utterly. You see. Dr. Mallory explained to me the unfortunate contretemps with his rival and fellow savant, Peter Foulke. It seems, you see, that even in the most rarified circles, during a period of such unprecedented stress—

You'll not see Peter bloody Foulke moving in your rarified bloody circles now, Velasco interjected, not for all his gentry posing. He paused for effect. He was discovered in bed with a girl not twelve years old!

No! Oliphant feigned shock. Foulke? But surely—

He was, Tate affirmed, in Brighton, and those as found him beat the bugger silly and flung him stark-naked into the street!

But it wasn't us did that, Velasco stated flatly, and you'll not prove it was.

There's a new trend of thought about, Tate said, thrusting his shallow chest forward so as to better display his Union Jack insignia, the gin-reddened tip of his button-nose glinting wetly, such as doesn't tolerate decadence, giving equal stress to the word's three syllables, be it in the savantry or however high at all. Hidden wickedness ran rife under Byron, all manner of it, and well you know it, Fraser! Fraser's eyes widened at this effrontery, as Tate turned in his excitement to Oliphant. That Stink was Ned Ludd's work, mister, and there's your history of it!

Sabotage on a titanic scale, Velasco pronounced darkly, as if quoting from a speech, abetted by conspirators in the highest ranks of society! But there are true patriots among us, sir, patriots at work to root that evil out! The terrier growled in Velasco's arms, and Fraser looked on the verge of throttling man and dog alike.

We're Parliamentary investigators, Tate said, about a Member's business, and I'm sure you'd not care to detain us.

Oliphant put his hand upon Fraser's sleeve.

With a smirk of triumph, Velasco soothed his little dog and sauntered to the stairs. Tate followed. From overhead came the mad yapping of dogs and the hoarse cries of sportsmen.

They're working for Egremont, Oliphant said.

Fraser's face twisted with disgust. Disgust and something akin to amazement.

There seems nothing more to be done here, Fraser. I take it you arranged for a cab?


Mr. Mori Arinori, Oliphant's favorite among his young Japanese pupils, took a fierce delight in all things British. Oliphant, who customarily breakfasted lightly if at all, would sometimes subject himself to massively English breakfasts to please Mori, who on this particular occasion wore the burliest of golfing-tweeds and a scarf in the tartan of the Royal Hibernian Order of Steam Engineers.

There was a certain enjoyably melancholy sense of paradox, Oliphant mused, in watching Mori spread a slice of toast with marmalade, while he himself indulged a nostalgia for his own days in Japan, where he had served as first-secretary under Rutherford Alcock. His stay in Edo had nurtured in him a passionate regard for the muted tones and subtle textures of a world of ritual and shadow. He longed now for the rattle of rain blown against oiled paper, for flowering weeds a-nod down tiny alleys, the glow of rush-lamps, for scents and darknesses, the shadows of the Low City

Oriphant-san, toast is very good, is most excellent! You are sad, Oriphant-san?

No, Mr. Mori, not at all. He helped himself to bacon, though he wasn't hungry in the least. He put aside a sudden intrusive memory of the morning's hideous bath, the black clinging rubber. I was recalling Edo. That city possessed great charm for me.

Mori chewed bread and marmalade, regarding Oliphant steadily with his bright dark eyes, then dabbed expertly at his lips with a linen napkin.  'Charm.' Your word for the old ways. The old ways hinder my nation. Only this week have I posted to Satsuma an argument against the wearing of swords. The bright eyes darted, for a fractional moment, toward the crooked fingers of Oliphant's left hand. As if stung by the pressure of Mori's awareness, the scar beneath Oliphant's cuff began a slow ache.

But, Mr. Mori, Oliphant said, setting his silver fork aside to abandon the unwanted bacon, the sword, in your country, is in many respects the focal symbol of the feudal ethic and the sentiments attaching to it—an object of reverence second only to one's own lord.

Mori smiled, pleased. Odious custom of rude and savage age. This is good to be rid of, Oriphant-san. This is modern day! This latter a favorite and frequent expression.

Oliphant returned the smile. Mori combined boldness and compassion with a certain problematical brashness that Oliphant found most appealing. More than once, to Bligh's dismay, Mori had paid some cockney cabman, full fare plus tip, and then invited the fellow into Oliphant's kitchen for a meal. But you must learn to proceed apace, Mr. Mori. While you yourself may regard the wearing of swords as a primitive custom, to openly oppose this minor matter might well provoke resistance to other, more important reforms, the deeper changes you wish to implement in your society.

Mori nodded gravely. Your policy no doubt has merit, Oriphant-san. Far better, for example, if all Japanese were taught English. Our meager tongue is of no use in the great world beyond our islands. Soon power of steam and the Engine must pervade our land. English language, following such, must suppress any use of Japanese. Our intelligent race, eager in pursuit of knowledge, cannot depend on weak and uncertain medium of communication. We must grasp principal truths from precious treasury of Western science!

Oliphant tilted his head to one side, considering Mori carefully. Mr. Mori, he said, pardon me if I misunderstand you, but am I correct in assuming that you are proposing nothing less than the deliberate abolition of the Japanese language?

This is modern day, Oriphant-san, modern day! All reasons support our tongue's disuse.

Oliphant smiled. We must arrange to discuss this at length, Mr. Mori, but now I must ask if you are engaged this evening. I propose an entertainment.

By all means, Oriphant-san. English social festivities are ever gratifying. Mori beamed.

We shall go then, to Whitechapel, to the Garrick Theatre, for what I understand is a most unusual pantomime.


According to the spottily stippled program, the Clown was known as Jackdaw Jaculation, though this was perhaps the least peculiar aspect of that evening's performance, by the Manhattan Women's Red Pantomime Troupe, of 'Mazulem the Night Owl'. Other characters included Freedman Bureau Bill, a black boy, Levy Stickemall, a merchant, offering two segars for five cents, a Yankee Peddler, a Lady Shop-Lifter, a Roast Turkey, and the eponymous Mazulem.

All of the players, to judge by the program, were female, though in several cases this would otherwise have been quite impossible to determine. The Clown, ornate with frills, in elaborately spangled satin, boasted an egg-bald shaven pate and the sinister white-face of the Pierrot, touched with color only in the outlined lips.

The performance had been preceded by a brief, ranting address from one Helen America, her heaving, apparently unconstrained bosom, through layers of diaphanous scarves, serving to hold the attention of the predominantly masculine audience. Her speech had consisted of slogans Oliphant found rather more cryptic than rousing. What exactly did it mean, for instance, when she declared that We have nothing to wear but our chains?

Consulting the program, he was informed that Helen America was in fact the authoress of 'Mazulem the Night Owl', as well as 'Harlequin Panattahah' and 'The Genii of the Algonquins'.

Musical accompaniment was provided by a moon-faced organist—her eyes, it seemed to Oliphant, glinting either with lunacy or laudanum.

The pantomime had opened in what Oliphant supposed was meant to be taken as a hotel dining-room, with the peripatetic Roast Turkey—apparently played by a dwarf—attacking the diners with a carving-knife. Oliphant had very quickly lost track of the narrative, if indeed there were one, which he doubted. Scenes were punctuated repeatedly by characters firing stuffed bricks at one another's heads. There was kinotropic accompaniment, of a sort, though it consisted of crudely polemical cartoons that seemed to bear little relationship to the action.

Oliphant stole a glance at Mori, who sat beside him, his treasured topper upright on his lap, his face expressionless. The audience was howlingly rowdy, though less in response to the substance of the pantomime, whatever that might be, than to the whirling, curiously formless dances of the Communard women, their bare shins and ankles plainly visible beneath the ragged hems of their flowing garments.

Oliphant's back began to ache.

The choreography accelerated into a sort of balletic assault, the air thick with brickbats, until, quite abruptly, 'Mazulem the Night Owl' was ended.

The crowd hooted, applauded, jeered. Oliphant noted a hulking, gaunt-jawed man with a stout rattan over his shoulder, lounging beside the entrance to the pit. The fellow was watching the crowd through narrowed eyes.

Come then, Mr. Mori. I sense a journalistic opportunity.

Mori stood, hat and evening-cane in hand. He followed Oliphant toward the pit.

Laurence Oliphant, journalist. He presented his card to the hulking man. If you would be so kind, you might convey this to Miss America with my request for an interview.

The man took the card, glanced at it, and let it fall to the floor. Oliphant saw the knobby fist tighten around the rattan. Mori emitted a brief hiss, as if of steam; Oliphant turned; Mori, his top-hat jammed firmly forward on his head, had assumed the pose of the samurai warrior, the handle of his evening-cane grasped in both his hands. Immaculate linen and gold links glinted at his supple wrists.

The untidily coiffed, extravagantly hennaed head of Helen America appeared. Her eyes were ringed with kohl.

Mori held his pose.

Miss Helen America? Oliphant produced a second card. Allow me to introduce myself. I am Laurence Oliphant, journalist 

Helen America performed a rapid manipulation before the stony face of her compatriot, as though she were conjuring something from the air. The man lowered his length of rattan, still glowering fiercely at Mori. The stick, Oliphant saw, was obviously weighted. Cecil's a deaf mute, she said, pronouncing the name with a case-hardened American e.

I'm very sorry. I offered my card—

He can't read. You say you're a newspaper-man?

An occasional journalist. And you, Miss America, are an authoress of the first-water. Allow me to introduce my good friend, Mr. Mori Arinori, an envoy of the Mikado of Japan.

With a deadly glance at Cecil, Mori reversed his cane with admirable grace, removed his hat, and bowed in the European fashion. Helen America, wide-eyed, regarded him as one might a trained dog. She wore a neatly mended military cloak, threadbare but apparently clean, in the shade of grey the Confederates called butternut, though the original regimental buttons had been replaced with plain round horn.

I haven't ever seen a Chinaman dress like that, she said.

Mr. Mori is Japanese.

And you're a newspaper-man.

After a fashion, yes.

Helen America smiled, revealing a gold tooth. And did you enjoy our show?

It was extraordinary, quite extraordinary.

Her smile widened. Then come to Manhattan, mister, for the People Risen have the old Olympic, east of Broadway, over Houston Street. We're best appreciated in our own venue. Thin bands of silver pierced her ears, amid a tangled cloud of hennaed curls.

It would be my great pleasure. As it would be my pleasure to conduct an interview with the authoress of—

I didn't write that, she said, Fox did.

Pardon me?

George Washington Lafayette Fox—the Marxian Grimaldi, the Tamla of socialist pantomime! It was the Troupe's decision to put that I wrote it, though I continue to argue against it.

But your prefatory message

Now I did write that, sir, and am proud of it. But poor Fox 

I hadn't heard, Oliphant submitted, somewhat baffled.

It was the terrible pressure of toil, she said. The great Fox, who'd single-handedly elevated socialist pantomime to its present level of revolutionary importance, was sweated mad by one-night stands, sir; driven to sheer exhaustion at having to contrive sharper tricks and quicker transformations. He slid into dementia then, his grimaces hideous to behold. She had assumed her stage delivery; now she lapsed back into a more confidential tone. He'd lapse into the crudest indecency, mister, so we kept his dresser in a monkey-suit, to run out and belabor him, if he got too obscene.

I'm very sorry—

Manhattan's no place for the mad, sir, sad to say. He's in the asylum in Somerville, Massachusetts, and if you'd care to publish that, be my guest.

Oliphant found that he was staring at her, entirely at a loss for words. Mori Arinori had retired somewhat, and seemed to be watching the crowd as it made its way out of the Garrick. The deaf-mute Cecil had vanished, taking with him his shot-loaded length of rattan.

I could eat a horse, Helen America said cheerfully.

Allow me, please, to provide you with a meal. Where do you wish to dine?

There's a place around the corner. As she stepped from the topmost of the steps that ascended the pit, Oliphant saw that she wore a pair of the rubber boots Americans called Chickamaugas, great clumsy things of military origin. With Mori at his side, he followed her out of the Garrick. She had not waited for him to offer his arm.

She led them down the street, and as she had said, around a corner. Gas-light flared, before a clacking kino-sign that checkered from MOSES & SONS AUTOCAFE into CLEAN MODERN RAPID and back again. Helen America glanced back with an encouraging smile, her callipygian hips swaying beneath the Confederate cloak and the tattered muslin of her remarkable stage-garment.

The Autocafe was crowded and noisy, packed with Whitechapel locals. Its iron-mullioned windows were opaque with steam. Oliphant had seen nothing like it before.

Helen America demonstrated how business was conducted here, taking up a rectangular gutta-percha tray from a stack of the things, and pushing it along a ledge of shining zinc. Above the ledge were several dozen miniature windows, trimmed with brass. Oliphant and Mori followed her example. Behind each window, a different dish was displayed. Oliphant, noting the coin-slots, fumbled for his change-purse. Helen America chose a slice of shepherd's pie, a helping of toad-in-the-hole, and fried chips, Oliphant providing the requisite coinage. An additional tuppence produced a copious quantity of very dubious-looking brown gravy, from a spigot. Mori chose a baked potato, a particular favorite of his, but declined the gravy-spigot. Oliphant, disoriented by the oddness of the place, opted for a pint of machine-made ale, from another spigot.

Clystra's liable to kill me for this, Helen America remarked, as they arranged their trays on a ridiculously small cast-iron table. The table, like the four chairs around it, was bolted into the concrete floor. Doesn't hold with us talking to gentlemen of the press. She shrugged, beneath her butternut cloak. She smiled happily and began to sort a small pile of cheap tin-ware, giving Mori a knife and dinner-fork. Have you been to a town called Brighton, mister?

Yes, actually, I have.

What kind of place is that?

Mori was examining, with keen interest, the rectangular dish of coarse grey cardboard beneath his potato.

It's very pleasant, Oliphant said, very picturesque. The Hydropathic Pavilion is quite famous—

Is it in England? Helen America asked, around a mouthful of toad-in-the-hole.

It is, yes.

Lot of working-folks?

Perhaps not, in the sense I take you to mean, though the various facilities and attractions employ a great many people.

Haven't seen a real factory-crowd since we got here. Well—let's eat! And with that, Helen America bent to the task. Dinner-conversation, Oliphant gathered, was not highly valued in Red Manhattan.

She left the cardboard dishes utterly devoid of scraps or crumbs, contriving to sop up the last dross of gravy with a chip she had carefully retained for this purpose.

Oliphant took out his notebook. Opening it, he removed a plain white card stippled with Florence Bartlett's Bow Street portrait. Are you familiar at all with Flora Barnett, the American actress. Miss America? She's enormously popular in Manhattan, or so I was recently told  Oliphant displayed the card.

She's no actress, mister. Nor an American either. She's a Southron, if you can even call her that; next thing to a damn' Frenchie. The People Risen don't need her kind. Hell, we've already hung our share of 'em!

Her kind?

Helen America met his gaze with a defiant stare. In a pig's eye, you're a journalist 

I'm sorry if—

Sorry like the rest of 'em. You give just about that much of a damn 

Miss America, please, I wish only to—

Thanks for the feed, mister, but you can't pump me, understand? And that brontosaur, that's got no damn' business over here in the first place! You got no right to it, and one day it'll sit in the Manhattan Metropolitan, for it belongs to the People Risen! And what makes you limeys think you can come digging up the People's natural treasures?

And in through the door, as if on cue, marched the very formidable Clown of the Manhattan Women's Red Pantomime Troupe, her bald pate hugely bonneted in polka-dot gingham, and her Chickamauga boots even larger than Helen America's.

Coming right this minute, Comrade Clystra, Helen America said.

The Clown fixed Oliphant with a murderous glare, and then the two were gone.

Oliphant looked at Mori. A peculiar evening, Mr. Mori.

Mori, apparently lost in contemplation of the Autocafe's clatter and bustle, took a moment to respond.

We will have places such as this in my country, Oriphant-san! Clean! Modern! Rapid!


Bligh, upon Oliphant's return to Half-Moon Street, followed him upstairs to the door of the study. May I come in for a moment, sir? Locking the door behind them with his own key, Bligh crossed to a miniature parquet bureau that supported Oliphant's smoking-things; unsealing the top of a humidor, he reached inside and removed a squat little cylinder of black-japanned tin. This was brought 'round to the kitchen door by a young man, sir. He wouldn't give his name, when asked. I took the liberty of opening it myself, sir, recalling some of the more heathen attempts, abroad 

Oliphant took the canister and unscrewed its lid. Perforated telegraph-tape.

And the young man?

A junior Engine-clerk, sir, to judge by the state of his shoes. Aside from the fact that he wore a clerk's cotton gloves, which he didn't remove.

And there was no message?

There was, sir. 'Tell him,' he said, 'that we can do no more, there is great danger, he mustn't ask again.' 

I see. Would you mind bringing up a pot of strong green-tea?

Alone, Oliphant set about removing the heavy glass from his personal receiving-telegraph, a matter of loosening four brass wing-screws. Placing the tall vitrine-like dome out of harm's way, he spent some minutes consulting the maker's instructional manual. After rummaging through several drawers, he located the requisite implements a walnut-handled brass hand-crank and a small gilt screw-driver embossed with the monogram of the Colt & Maxwell Company. He located the knife-switch at the base of the instrument and severed the electrical connection with the Post Office. He then used the screwdriver to make the necessary adjustments, carefully threaded the end of the tape onto the bright steel sprockets, locked the guide-plates into position, and took a deep breath.

He was all at once aware of the beating of his own heart, and of the night's silence pressing in from the darkness of Green Park, and of the Eye. He took up the crank, thrust its hexagonal tip into the mechanism's socket, and began, steadily but slowly, to turn it clockwise. The character-hammers began to rise and fall, rise and fall, deciphering the punch-code of the Post Office tape. He refused to look at it, as it emerged from the slot.

It was done. With scissors and paste-pot, he assembled the message on a sheet of foolscap



DEAR CHARLES COMMA NINE YEARS AGO YOU PUT ME TO THE WORST DISHONOR THAT A WOMAN CAN KNOW STOP CHARLES COMMA YOU PROMISED ME THAT YOU WOULD SAVE MY POOR FATHER STOP INSTEAD YOU CORRUPTED ME COMMA BODY AND SOUL STOP TODAY I AM LEAVING LONDON COMMA IN THE COMPANY OF POWERFUL FRIENDS STOP THEY KNOW VERY WELL WHAT A TRAITOR YOU WERE TO WALTER GERARD COMMA AND TO ME STOP DO NOT ATTEMPT TO FIND ME COMMA CHARLES STOP IT WOULD BE USELESS STOP I DO HOPE THAT YOU AND MRS EGREMONT WILL SLEEP SOUNDLY TONIGHT STOP SYBIL GERARD ENDIT


Only barely aware of Bligh arriving with the tea, he sat unmoving for the better part of an hour, the message before him. Then, after pouring himself a cup of luke-warm tea, he gathered stationery, took out his reservoir-pen, and began to compose, in his flawless diplomat's French, a letter to a certain Monsieur Arslau, of Paris.


Flash-powder still stank in the air.

The Prince Consort turned, with his full Teutonic gravity, from an elaborate stereoptic camera, of Swiss manufacture, and greeted Oliphant in German. He wore aquamarine spectacles, their circular lenses no larger than florins, and was draped in a photographer's smock of spotless white duck. His fingers were stained with silver nitrate.

Oliphant bowed, wishing His Highness a good afternoon in what amounted to the Royal Family's language of choice, and pretended to examine the Swiss camera, an intricate creation whose stereoptic lenses, like eyes, stared from beneath a smooth brass brow. Like the eyes of Mr. Cart, the Consort's muscular Swiss valet, they struck Oliphant as being set rather too widely apart.

I've brought Affie a little gift, Your Highness, Oliphant said. His German, like the Prince Consort's, had the accent of Saxony—the legacy of a prolonged and delicate mission Oliphant had undertaken there at the behest of the Royal Family. Prince Albert's Coburg relatives, ever ingenious at the ancient craft of marriage-politics, were eager to expand their tiny domain—a delicate matter indeed, when the policy of the British Foreign Office was to keep the German mini-states as fragmented as politically possible. Has the young Prince concluded his day's lessons?

Affie is ill today, Albert said, peering through his tinted spectacles at one of the camera's lenses. He produced a small brush and lightly whisked at the surface of the lens. He straightened. Do you think the study of statistics too much a burden for a tender young mind?

My opinion, Your Highness? Oliphant said. Statistical analysis is indeed a powerful technique 

His mother and I disagree on the matter, the Prince confided mournfully. And Alfred's progress in the subject is far from satisfactory. Nevertheless, statistics is the key to the future. Statistics are everything in England.

Does he progress well in his other studies? Oliphant hedged.

Anthropometry, the Prince suggested absently. Eugenics. Powerful fields of learning, but less taxing, perhaps, to the youthful brain.

Perhaps I might have a word with him. Your Highness, Oliphant said. I know the lad means well.

He is in his room, no doubt, the Prince said.

Oliphant made his way through the drafty glamor of the Royal Apartments to Alfred's room, where he was greeted with a whoop of glee, the Prince scrambling in bare-feet from mounded bedclothes and hopping nimbly across the tracks of a most elaborate miniature railway. Uncle Larry! Uncle Larry! Brilliant! What have you brought for me?

Baron Zorda's latest.

In Oliphant's pocket, wrapped in green tissue and smelling strongly of cheap fresh ink, was a copy of 'Paternoster the Steam Bandit', by one Baron Zorda, the third volume in the popular series, young Prince Alfred having expressed his unbridled enthusiasm for the two previous numbers, 'The Skeleton Amy' and 'Wheelmen of the Tsar'. The book's garishly colored cover depicted the daring Paternoster, pistol in hand, climbing from the cabin of a hurtling vehicle one took to be a gurney in the latest style—sheathed in tin, bulbous at the prow, and very narrow in the rear. The frontispiece, which Oliphant had examined in the Piccadilly news-agent's where he had purchased the volume, offered Baron Zorda's raffish highwayman in rather more detail, particularly in regard to his dress, which included a broad belt of studded leather and bell-bottomed trousers with buttoned vents at the cuffs.

Super! The boy eagerly tore the green tissue from Paternoster the Steam Bandit. Look at his gurney. Uncle Larry! It's line-streamed like sixty!

Nothing but the swiftest for wicked Paternoster, Affie. And see the frontispiece. He's got up like Smashjaw Ned.

Look at his narrow-go-wides, Alfred said admiringly. And his bloody great belt!

And how have you been, Affie, Oliphant asked, ignoring the boy's lapse in language, since my last visit?

Very well, Uncle Larry—and a shadow of anxiety crossed the young face—but I'm afraid I—I'm afraid she—she's broken, you see— The Prince pointed to where the Japanese tea-doll slumped disconsolately against the foot of the massive four-poster, surrounded by a tumbled sea of lithographed tin and painted lead. A long sharp sliver of some translucent material protruded grotesquely from her gorgeous robe. It's the spring, you see. I think it was wound too tightly, Uncle Larry. It sprang right out, on the tenth turn.

The Japanese power their dolls with springs of baleen, Affie. 'Whale-whiskers,' they call the stuff. They haven't yet learned from us the manufacture of proper springs, but soon they shall. When they do, their dolls shan't break so easily.

Father says you're too keen on your Japanese, Alfred said. He says you think them the equal of Europeans.

And I do, Affie! Their mechanical appliances are presently inferior, due to their lack of knowledge in the applied sciences. Some day, in futurity, they may lead civilization to heights yet untold. They, and perhaps the Americans

The boy regarded him dubiously. Father wouldn't like that at all, what you said.

No, I rather doubt he would.

Oliphant then spent half-an-hour, down on his knees upon the carpet, watching Alfred demonstrate a toy French Engine—operated, as was its cousin the Great Napoleon, by compressed air. The little Engine employed lengths of telegraph-tape, rather than cards, reminding Oliphant of his letter to M. Arslau. Bligh would have taken it 'round to the French Embassy by now; very likely it was already on its way to Paris by diplomatic pouch.

Alfred was connecting his Engine to a miniature kinotrope. There came a ceremonious rattle at the door-knob; the doors of Buckingham Palace were never knocked. Oliphant rose, and opened the tall white portal, to discover the well-known face of Nash, a palace valet-de-chambre, whose unwise speculations in railway shares had briefly made him the unwilling intimate of the Metropolitan Fraud Bureau. Oliphant's politesse had successfully smoothed the matter—a kindness well-invested, he saw now, by Nash's unfeigned air of respectful attention. Mr. Oliphant, Nash announced, a telegram has come, sir. Most urgent.


The velocity of the Special Branch vehicle contributed in no small part to Oliphant's general sense of unease. Paternoster himself could have asked for nothing faster, or more radically line-streamed.

They flew past St. James's Park with the speed of dream, the bare black branches of the lime-trees flashing by like wind-driven smoke. The driver wore leather goggles with round lenses, and plainly relished their headlong flight, periodically sounding a deep-throated whistle that sent horses rearing and pedestrians scurrying. The stoker, a burly young Irishman, was grinning maniacally as he shoveled coke into the burner.

Oliphant had no idea of their destination. Now, as they neared Trafalgar, the traffic caused the driver to yank the whistle-cord continually, steadily, setting up a mournful bellowing ululation, like the grief of some marine behemoth. The traffic, at this sound, parted like the Red Sea before Moses. Helmeted policemen saluted smartly as they sped past. Urchins and crossing-sweepers turned cartwheels of delight, at the sight of a sleek tin fish racketing down the Strand.

The evening had grown quite dark. As they entered Fleet Street, the driver applied the brake and worked a lever that released a mighty gout of uprushing steam. The line-streamed gurney bumped to a halt.

Well, sir, the driver commented, raising his goggles to peer through the fretted glass of the vehicle's prow, would you look at that.

Traffic, Oliphant saw, had been halted completely by the erection of wooden barricades hung with lanterns. Behind these stood grim-faced soldiers in combat drab, Cutts-Maudslay carbines unslung and at the ready. Beyond them, he saw sheets of canvas, loosely hung from raw timber uprights, as though someone were attempting to erect stage-scenery in the middle of Fleet Street.

The stoker swabbed his face with a polka-dot kingsman. Something here the press aren't meant to see.

They've put it in the wrong street, then, the driver said, haven't they?

As Oliphant climbed from the gurney, Fraser came walking quickly toward him. We've found her, Fraser said glumly.

And seem to have attracted considerable publicity in the process. Perhaps a few less infantry would be in order?

It isn't a matter for levity, Mr. Oliphant. You'd best come with me.

Is Betteredge here?

Haven't seen him. This way, please. Fraser led the way between a pair of barricades. A soldier curtly nodded them past.

Oliphant glimpsed a mustachioed gentleman in urgent conversation with two Metropolitans. That's Halliday, he said, chief of Criminal Anthropometry.

Yes, sir, Fraser said. They're all over this one. The Museum of Practical Geology has been broken into. The Royal Society is angry as a nest of hornets, and bloody Egremont will be in every first-edition, calling it a Luddite outrage. Our only bit of luck would seem to be that Dr. Mallory is well away in China.

Mallory? Why is that?

The Land Leviathan. Mrs. Bartlett and her cohorts attempted to make away with the thing's skull.

They rounded one of the makeshift barriers, its coarse fabric stamped at intervals with the broad-arrow mark of the Army Ordnance Department.

A cab-horse lay on its side in a great pool of darkening blood. The cab, a common one-horse fly, was overturned nearby, its dull black-lacquered panels stitched with bullet-holes.

She was with two men, Fraser said. Three if you count a corpse they left behind in the Museum. The hack was driven by a Yankee exile called Russell, a bully-rock bruiser living in Seven Dials. The other man was Henry Dease of Liverpool, quite the accomplished cracksman. I'd our Henry in dock ten times, when I was on the force, but no more. They're laid out there, sir. He pointed. Russell, the driver, evidently got into a shouting match with a real cabman, over who should give way. A Metropolitan on traffic-duty attempted to intervene, at which point Russell produced a pistol.

Oliphant was staring at the overturned cab.

The traffic officer was unarmed, but a pair of Bow Street detectives happened to be passing 

But this cab, Fraser

That's the work of an Army-gurney, sir. The last of the temporary garrisons is just by the Holborn viaduct. He paused. Dease had a Russian shotgun 

Oliphant shook his head in disbelief.

Eight civilians taken to hospital, Fraser said. One detective dead. But come along, sir—best we get this done with.

What is the meaning of these canvas screens?

Criminal Anthropometry ordered them.

Oliphant felt as though he were moving through a dream, his limbs numb and without volition. He allowed himself to be led to where three canvas-draped bodies were arranged upon stretchers.

The face of Florence Bartlett was a hideous ruin.

Vitriol, Fraser said. A bullet shattered whatever container she employed.

Oliphant turned quickly away, retching into his handkerchief.

Sorry, sir, Fraser said. No point in you seeing the other two.

Betteredge, Fraser—have you seen him?

No, sir. Here's the skull, sir, or what remains of it.

The skull?

Perhaps half-a-dozen massive fragments of petrified bone and ivory-tinted plaster were neatly arranged atop a varnished trestle-table. There's a Mr. Reeks here, from the Museum, come to take it back, Fraser said. Says it isn't as badly damaged as we might think. Would you like to sit down, sir? I could find you a folding-stool—

No. Why does there seem to be fully half of Criminal Anthropometry about, Fraser?

Well, sir, you're in a better position to determine that than I, Fraser said, lowering his voice, though I've heard it said that Mr. Egremont and Lord Galton have recently discovered they've much in common.

Lord Galton? The eugenics theorist?

Lord Darwin's cousin, that is. He's Anthropometry's man in the House of Lords. Has a deal of influence in the Royal Society. Fraser brought out his notebook. You'd best see why I thought it urgent you come here, sir. He led Oliphant back around the ruin of the cab. Glancing about for possible observers, he passed Oliphant a fold of blue flimsy. I took it from the Bartlett woman's reticule.

The note was undated, unsigned



That which you so persistently desire has been located, albeit in a most peculiar hiding-place. I am informed, by our mutual acquaintance of the Derby, Dr. Mallory, that it has been sealed up within the skull of his Land Leviathan. I would hope that you will consider this crucial intelligence a full repayment of all my debts to you. I am in some peril now, from recent political developments, and certainly I am observed by elements of Government; pray consider that in any further attempt to communicate. I have done all that I can, I swear it.


The elegant hand, as familiar to Oliphant as it was to Fraser, was Lady Ada Byron's.

The two of us alone have seen that, Fraser said.

Oliphant folded the paper in quarters before putting it away in his cigar-case. And what exactly was it, Fraser, that was hidden in the skull?

I'll escort you back through the line, sir.

Reporters surged forward as Fraser and Oliphant emerged from the barricades. Fraser took Oliphant's arm and led him into a cluster of helmeted Metropolitans, some of whom he greeted casually by name. To answer your question, Mr. Oliphant, Fraser said, the policemen walling off the shouting crowd behind blue serge and brass buttons, I don't know. But we have it.

You do? By whose authority?

None but my own lights, Fraser said. Harris here, he found it in the cab, before Anthropometry arrived. Fraser very nearly smiled. The boys on the force aren't too keen on Anthropometry. Bloody-minded amateurs, aye, Harris?

Aye, sir, said a Metropolitan with blond side-whiskers, they are that.

Where is it, then? Oliphant asked.

Here, sir. Harris produced a cheap black satchel. Just as we found it, in this.

Mr. Oliphant, sir, I think you'd best take that straight away, Fraser said.

Indeed, Fraser, I agree. Tell the Special Branch chap in the fancy gurney that I won't be needing him. Thank you, Harris. Good evening. The policemen parted smoothly. Oliphant, satchel in hand, strode smartly out through the throng who jostled for a better view of the soldiers and the canvas screens.

Pardon, guv, but couldyer spare a copper?

Oliphant looked down into the squinting brown eyes of little Boots, every inch the crippled jockey. He was neither. Oliphant threw him a penny. Boots caught it adroitly, then edged forward on his cut-down crutch. He stank of damp fustian and smoked mackerel. Trouble, guv. Becky'll tell yer. Boots wheeled about on his crutch and hobbled determinedly away, muttering as he went, a beggar intent upon finding a better pitch.

He was one of Oliphant's two most talented watchers.

The other, Becky Dean, kept pace beside Oliphant as he neared the corner of Chancery Lane. She was gotten up as a rather successful tart, brass-heeled and brazen.

Where has Betteredge got to? Oliphant asked, as if talking to himself.

Taken, Becky Dean said. Not three hours ago.

Taken by whom?

Two men in a hack. They'd been following you. Betteredge got on to them, then set us to watching the watchers.

I knew nothing of this.

Day before yesterday, he came to us.

And who were these men?

One's a greasy little ponce of a private detective. Velasco his name is. The other was Government by the look of him.

He was taken in broad daylight? By force?

You know well enough how it's done, Becky Dean said.


In the soothing reek of his tobacconist's quiet stock-room, at the corner of Chancery Lane and Carey Street, Oliphant held the corner of the blue flimsy above the concise jet of a bronze cigar-lighter in the shape of a turbaned Turk.

He watched the paper reduce itself to delicate pinkish ash.

The satchel had contained a Ballester-Molina automatic revolver, a silvered-brass pocket-flask filled with some sickly, sweet-scented decoction, and a wooden case. This last was plainly the object in question, encrusted as it was with raw white plaster. It held a very large number of Engine-cards in the Napoleon gauge, cut from a novel material, milky and very smooth to the touch.

The parcel, he said to Mr. Beadon, the tobacconist, is to be held for me alone.

Certainly, sir.

My man Bligh to be the sole exception.

As you wish, sir.

If any inquiry at all should be made, Beadon, please send a boy 'round to advise Bligh.

Our pleasure, sir.

Thank you, Beadon. Could you possibly give me forty pounds cash, against my account?

Forty, sir?

Yes.

Yes I could, sir. With pleasure, Mr. Oliphant. Mr. Beadon took a ring of keys from his coat and went to unlock an admirably modern-looking safe.

And a dozen prime habanas. And Beadon?

Yes, sir?

I think it might be a very good idea if you were to keep the parcel in your safe there.

Of course, sir.

I believe that the Lambs is nearby, Beadon, the dining-club?

Yes, sir. Holborn, sir. A short walk.


The year's first snow began to fall, as he made his way up Chancery Lane, a dry gritty stuff that seemed unlikely to adhere to the paving.

Boots and Becky Dean were nowhere to be seen, which could reliably be taken to mean that they were about their customarily invisible business.

You know well enough how it's done.

And didn't he? How many had been made to vanish, vanish utterly, in London alone? How could one sit among friends at pleasant little dinners, sipping Moselle, listening to kind and careless talk, yet carry in one's mind the burden of such knowledge?

He'd meant Collins to be the last, absolutely the last; now Betteredge had gone, and at the hands of another agency.

In the beginning, it had made so horribly elegant a sort of sense.

In the beginning, it had been his idea.

The Eye. He sensed it now—yes, surely, its all-seeing gaze full upon him as he nodded to the tasseled doorman and entered the marbled vestibule of the Lambs, Andrew Wakefield's dining club.

Brass letter-boxes, a telegraph-booth, an excess of French-polished veneer, all thoroughly modern. He glanced back, through glass doors, to the street. Opposite the Lambs, beyond twin streams of snow-dusted traffic, he glimpsed a solitary figure in a tall derby hat.

A page directed him to the grill-room, which was done in dark oak, with an enormous fireplace topped with a mantel of carved Italian stone. Laurence Oliphant, he told the tightly jacketed head-waiter, for Mr. Andrew Wakefield.

A look of unease crossed the man's face. I'm sorry, sir, but he isn't—

Thank you, Oliphant said, but I believe I see Mr. Wakefield.

With the head-waiter at his heels, Oliphant marched between the tables, diners turning as he passed.

Andrew, he said, arriving at Wakefield's table, how very fortunate to find you here.

Wakefield was dining alone. He seemed to experience a temporary difficulty in swallowing.

Mr. Wakefield, sir, the head-waiter began.

My friend will be joining me, Wakefield said. Sit down, please. We're attracting attention.

Thank you. Oliphant took a seat.

Will you be dining, sir? the head-waiter asked.

No, thank you.

When they were alone, Wakefield sighed loudly. Damn it all, Oliphant, but didn't I make my terms clear?

What exactly is it, Andrew, of which you've become so frightened?

It should be fairly obvious.

Should it?

Lord Galton's in league with your bloody Mr. Egremont. He's the great patron of Criminal Anthropometry. Always has been. Their virtual founder. He's Charles Darwin's cousin, Oliphant, and he wields great influence in the House of Lords.

Yes, and in the Royal Society, and in the Geographical as well. I'm thoroughly familiar with Lord Galton, Andrew. He espouses the systematic breeding of the human species.

Wakefield put down his knife and fork. Criminal Anthropometry have effectively taken over the Bureau. For all intents and purposes, the Central Statistics Bureau is now under Egremont's control.

Oliphant watched as Wakefield's upper teeth began to worry at his lower-lip.

I've just come from Fleet Street, Oliphant said. The level of violence in this society—and he drew the Ballester-Molina from within his coat—or rather, I should say, the level of unacknowledged violence, has become remarkable, don't you think, Andrew? He placed the revolver on the linen between them. Take this pistol as an example. All too readily obtainable, I'm told. It is of Franco-Mexican manufacture, though the invention of Spaniards. Certain of its internal parts, I am informed, springs and whatnot, are actually British, available on the open market. It becomes rather difficult, then, to say where a weapon like this comes from. Emblematic of something in our current situation, don't you think?

Wakefield had gone quite white.

But I seem to have upset you, Andrew. I'm sorry.

They'll erase us, Wakefield said. We'll cease to exist. There'll be nothing left, nothing to prove either of us ever lived. Not a check-stub, not a mortgage in a City bank, nothing whatever.

Exactly what I'm on about, Andrew.

Don't take that moral tone with me, sir, Wakefield said. Your lot began it, Oliphant—the disappearances, the files gone missing, the names expunged, numbers lost, histories edited to suit specific ends No, don't take that tone with me. 

Oliphant could think of nothing to say. He rose, leaving the pistol on the table-cloth, and left the grill-room without looking back.

Pardon me, he said, in the marbled vestibule, to a burgundy-jacketed bellman who was sifting cigar-ends from a sand-filled marble um, but could you please direct me to the office of the club steward?

You bet, the bellman said, or some similar bit of American dialect, and led Oliphant smartly away, down a corridor lined with mirrors and rubber-plants.

Fifty-five minutes later, having toured the club's premises at some length, having been shown a photographic album of the Lambs' annual gambols, having applied for membership, and having paid a not inconsiderable initiation fee, nonrefundable, via his own number in the National Credit, Oliphant shook hands with the pomaded steward, gave the man a pound-note, and requested that he be let out by the club's most obscure trade-entrance.

This proved to be a scullery-door which opened on exactly the sort of dank and narrow passage he had hoped for.

Within a quarter-of-an-hour, he stood at the public bar of a crowded house in Bedford Road, reviewing the text of the telegram that one Sybil Gerard had once dispatched to Mr. Charles Egremont, M.P., of Belgravia.

Lost both me boys o' sickness in the Crimea, squire, an' innit allus the tele-gram comes—innit?

Oliphant folded the sheet of foolscap into his cigar-case. He watched his dim reflection in the polished zinc of the bar. He looked at his empty tumbler. He looked up at the woman, a raddled hairidan in rags gone a color that had no name, her cheeks roseate with gin-blossoms under a patina of grime.

No, he said, that tragedy is not mine.

Me Roger it was, she said,  'n' Tommy-lad too. An' not a rag come 'ome, squire—not a bloody rag 

He handed her a coin. She thanked him, mumbling, and retreated.

He seemed to have thoroughly slipped the traces for the moment. He was entirely alone. It was time to find a cab.


In the dim, high hollow of the great station a thousand voices seemed to mingle, the constituent elements of language reduced to the aural equivalent of fog, homogeneous and impenetrable.

Oliphant went about his business below at a measured and deliberate pace, purchasing a first-class railway ticket to Dover, reserved, for the ten o'clock evening-express. The ticket-clerk seated Oliphant's National Credit plate in the machine and cranked hard on the lever.

There you are, sir. Reserved in your name.

Thanking the clerk, Oliphant made his way to a second wicket, where he again produced his plate. I wish to book a cabinette on the morning mail-boat to Ostend. Apparently as an afterthought, as he was putting the boat-tickets and his National Credit plate into his note-case, he requested a second-class ticket on the midnight boat to Calais.

Would that be this evening, sir?

Yes.

That would be the Bessemer, sir. On National Credit, sir?

Oliphant paid for the ticket to Calais with pound-notes from Mr. Beadon's safe.

Ten till nine, by his father's gold hunter.

At nine o'clock he boarded a departing train at the last possible moment, paying the first-class fare to Dover directly to the conductor.


The swinging-saloon ship Bessemer, her twin turtle-decks awash with Dover spray, steamed for Calais sharp on the midnight. Oliphant, having visited the purser with his second-class ticket and his pound-notes, was seated in a brocade armchair in the saloon cabin, sipping mediocre brandy and taking the measure of his fellow passengers. They were, he was pleased to note, a thoroughly unremarkable lot.

He disliked swinging-saloons, finding the Engine-controlled movements of the cabin, intended to compensate for the vessel's pitch and roll, somehow more unsettling than the ordinary motion of a ship at sea. In addition, the cabin itself was effectively windowless. Swung on gimbals in a central well, the cabin was mounted so deeply in the hull that its windows, such as they were, were located high up along the walls, well above one's line of sight. All in all, as a remedy for mal-de-mer, Oliphant thought it excessive. The public, however, were apparently fascinated by the novel employment of a small Engine, somewhat on the order of a gunnery Engine, whose sole task consisted of maintaining as near a level footing in the cabin as was deemed possible. This was accomplished via something the press referred to, in clacker's argot, as back-feed. Still, with twin paddles fore and aft, the Bessemer customarily performed the distance of twenty-one miles between Dover and Calais in an hour and thirty minutes.

He would rather have been above-decks, now, facing into the wind; able then, perhaps, to imagine himself steaming toward some grander, more accessible goal. But the promenade of a swinging-saloon offered no bulwark, only an iron railing, and the Channel wind was damp and cold. And he had, he reminded himself, only the one goal now, and it, in all likelihood, a fool's errand.

Still Sybil Gerard. He had decided, upon reading the telegram to Egremont, against having her number spun. He had expected it might attract unwanted attention; with Criminal Anthropometry holding sway at Central Statistics, of course, he had been proven correct. And he rather suspected that Sybil Gerard's file might no longer exist.

Walter Gerard of Manchester, sworn enemy of progress, agitator for the rights of man. Hanged. And if Walter Gerard had had a daughter, what might have become of her? And if she had been ruined, as she claimed to have been, by Charles Egremont?

Oliphant's back began to ache. Beneath the chair's stiff brocade, Jacquard-woven with repeated images of the Bessemer, the horsehair stuffing held a chill.

But if nothing else, he reminded himself, he at least had temporarily escaped the soft black pit of Dr. McNeile's patent Swiss bath-tub.

Putting his brandy aside unfinished, he nodded then, and napped.

And dreamed, perhaps, of the Eye.

The Bessemer docked at Calais at half past one.


Monsieur Lucien Arslau's apartments were in Passy. At noon, Oliphant presented his card to the concierge, who conveyed it via pneumatic tube to Monsieur Arslau's establishment. Almost immediately, the whistle attached to a nickeled speaking-tube peeped twice; the concierge bent his ear to the funnel; Oliphant made out faint tones of shouted French.

The concierge showed Oliphant to the lift.

He was admitted, on the fifth floor, by a liveried manservant wearing an ornate Corsican stiletto through a pleated sash of gros de Naples. The young man managed to bow without taking his eyes from Oliphant. Monsieur Arslau regretted, the servant said, that he was unable at the moment to receive Monsieur Oliphant; in the meantime, would Monsieur Oliphant care for any sort of refreshment?

Oliphant declared that he would very much appreciate an opportunity to bathe. He would also find a pot of coffee most agreeable.

He was led through a broad drawing-room, rich in satin and ormolu, buhl cabinets, bronzes, statuettes, and porcelain, where the lizard-eyed Emperor and his dainty Empress, the former Miss Howard, gazed from twin portraits in oil. And then through a morning-room hung with proof-engravings. A graceful curve of stairway mounted from an octagonal anteroom.

Some two hours later, having bathed in a marble-rimmed tub of gratifying solidity, having taken strong French coffee and lunched upon cutlets a la Maintenon, and wearing borrowed linen with far more starch than he cared for, he was ushered into the study of Monsieur Arslau.

Mr. Oliphant, sir, Arslau said, in his excellent English, it is a great pleasure. I regret not having been able to see you earlier, but  He gestured toward a broad mahogany desk littered with files and papers. From behind a closed door came the steady clatter of a telegraph. On one wall hung a framed engraving of the Great Napoleon, its mighty gear-towers rising behind a grid-work of plate-glass and iron.

Not at all, Lucien. I'm grateful to have had the time to take advantage of your hospitality. Your chef has an extraordinary way with mutton; a sublimated meat that could scarcely have grown on any mundane sheep.

Arslau smiled. Nearly Oliphant's height, broader in the shoulders, he was some forty years of age and wore his greying beard in the Imperial fashion. His cravat was embroidered with small golden bees. I've had your letter, of course. He returned to his desk and settled himself in a high-backed chair upholstered in dark-green leather. Oliphant took a seat in an armchair opposite.

I must admit my curiosity, Laurence, as to what it is you are currently about. Arslau made a steeple of his fingers and peered over them, raising his eyebrows. The nature of your request would hardly seem to warrant the precautions you deem necessary 

On the contrary, Lucien, you must know that I would not presume in this way upon our acquaintance for any but the most pressing of reasons.

But no, my friend, Arslau said, with a dismissive little wave of his hands, you have asked the merest of favors. Among colleagues, men such as ourselves, it is nothing. I am simply curious; it is one of my many vices. You convey to me a letter by Imperial diplomatic pouch—no mean feat in itself, for an Englishman, though I know that you are familiar with our friend Bayard. Your letter requires my help in locating a certain English adventuress, no more. You believe she may be resident in France. Yet you stress the need for very great secrecy; you warn me particularly against communicating with you either by telegraph or by the regular post. You instruct me to await your arrival. What am I to make of this? Have you succumbed at last to the wiles of some woman?

Alas, I have not.

Given the current model of English womanhood, my friend, I find that entirely understandable. Far too many of your gentlewomen aspire to be elevated to the level of masculine intellectuality—superior to crinoline, superior to pearl-powder, above taking the pains to be pretty, above making themselves agreeable in any way! What a dreary, utilitarian, entirely ugly life an Englishman shall eventually lead, if this trend continues! So why then, I ask, have you crossed the Channel to find an English adventuress? Not that we haven't our share of them. They're rather thick upon the ground, actually, not to mention the origin—Arslau smiled—of our own Empress.

You yourself have never married, Lucien, Oliphant remarked, attempting to deflect Arslau from his purpose.

But look at matrimony! Who is to say which shall be the one judicious selection out of the nine hundred and ninety-nine mistakes? Which is to be the one eel out of the barrel of snakes? The girl on the kerbstone may be the one woman out of every female creature in this universe capable of making me a happy man, my friend, yet I pass her by, and bespatter her with the mud from my wheels, in my utter ignorance! Arslau laughed. No, I have not married, and your mission is a political one.

Of course.

Things are not well with Britain. I don't need my British sources to tell me that, Oliphant. The papers suffice. The death of Byron

Great Britain's political direction, Lucien—indeed, her ultimate stability as a nation—may even now be at stake. I need not remind you of the paramount importance of our two nations' continued mutual recognition and support.

And the matter of this Miss Gerard, Oliphant? Shall I take it you suggest she is somehow pivotal in the situation?

Oliphant took out his cigar-case and selected one of Beadon's habanas. His fingers brushed the folded text of Sybil Gerard's telegram. He closed the case. Do you mind if I smoke?

Please do.

Thank you. The matters which hinge upon Sybil Gerard are entirely British, entirely domestic. They may stand, ultimately, to affect France, but in a most indirect way. Oliphant clipped and pierced his cigar.

Are you entirely sure of that?

I am.

I am not. Arslau rose to bring Oliphant a copper ashtray atop a walnut stand. He returned to his desk but remained standing. What do you know of the Jacquardine Society?

They are the approximate equivalent of our Steam Intellect Society, are they not?

Yes and no. There is another, a secret society, within the Jacquardines. They style themselves Les Fils de Vaucanson. Certain of them are anarchists, others in league with the Marianne, others with the Universal Fraternity, others with any sort of rabble. Class-war conspirators, you understand? Others are simply criminals. But you know this, Laurence.

Oliphant took a lucifer from a box emblazoned with a stippled image of the Bessemer, and struck it. He lit his cigar.

You tell me that the woman you know as Sybil Gerard is of no concern to France, Arslau said.

You think otherwise?

Perhaps. Tell me what you know of our difficulties with the Great Napoleon.

Very little. Wakefield of Central Statistics mentioned it to me. The Engine is no longer functioning accurately?

Ordinateurs, thank the good God, are not my specialty. The Napoleon performs with its accustomed speed and accuracy in most instances, I am informed, but an outre element of inconstancy presently haunts the machine's higher functions  Arslau sighed. Those higher functions being deemed a matter of considerable national pride, I have myself been forced to peruse reams of the most abstruse technical prose in the Empire. To no ultimate avail, it now seems, as we've had the culprit in hand.

The culprit?

An avowed member of Les Fils de Vaucanson. His name is of no importance. He was arrested in Lyons in connection with an ordinary case of civil fraud involving a municipal ordinateur. Elements of his subsequent confession brought him to the attention of the Commission of Special Services, and hence to ours. During interrogation, he revealed his responsibility for the current lamentable state of our Great Napoleon.

He confessed to le sabotage, then?

No. He would not confess to that. He refused, until the end. With regard to the Napoleon, he would admit only to having run a certain sequence of punch-cards, a mathematical formula.

Oliphant watched the smoke from his cigar spiral toward the high ceiling's ornate plaster rosette.

The formula came from London, Arslau continued. He obtained it from an Englishwoman. Her name was Sybil Gerard.

Have you attempted analysis of this formula?

No. It was stolen, our Jacquardine claimed, spirited away by a woman he knew as Flora Bartelle, apparently an American.

I see.

Then tell me what you see, my friend, for I myself am very much in the dark.

The Eye. All-seeing, the sublime weight of its perception pressing in upon him from every direction.

Oliphant hesitated. Ash from his cigar fell unnoticed to Arslau's rich carpet. I have yet to meet Sybil Gerard, he said, but I may be able to offer you information regarding this formula you've mentioned. It may even be possible to obtain a copy. I can promise nothing, however, until I myself am allowed to interview the lady in question, privately and at some length.

Arslau fell silent. He seemed to look through Oliphant. At last he nodded. We can arrange that.

She is not, I take it, in custody?

Let us say that we are aware of her movements.

You allow her apparent freedom, yet observe her closely?

Precisely that. If we take her now, and she reveals nothing, the trail goes cold.

As ever, Arslau, your technique is impeccable. And when might it be arranged for me to meet with her?

The Eye, the pressure, the pounding of his heart.

This evening, if you so desire, said Monsieur Arslau of the Police des Chateaux, adjusting his gold-embroidered cravat.


The walls of the Cafe de l'Univers were hung with paintings, etched mirrors, and enamel plaques advertising the ubiquitous product of Pernod Fils. The pictures, if one could call them that, were either grotesque daubs, seemingly executed in a messy imitation of Engine-stippling, or queer geometric formulations suggesting the restless motion of kinotrope-bits. In some cases, Oliphant supposed, the painters themselves were present—or such he took them to be, these long-haired fellows in velvet caps, their corduroy trousers smeared with pigment and tobacco-ash. But the majority of the clientele—according to his companion, one Jean Beraud—consisted of kinotropistes. These gentlemen of the Latin Quarter sat and drank with their black-clad grisettes at the round marble tables, or held forth on theoretical matters before small groups of their peers.

Beraud, in an unseasonable boater and a brown suit of intensely Gallic cut, was one of Arslau's mouchards, a professional informer who referred to the kinotropists as members of le milieu. He was fresh and rosy as a young pig, he drank Vittel and peppermint, and Oliphant had taken an immediate dislike to him. The kinotropists seemed to favor the absinthe of Pernod Fils; Oliphant, sipping a glass of red wine, watched the ritual of glass and water-decanter, of sugar-lump and trowel-shaped spoon.

Absinthe is the bed of tuberculosis, Beraud said.

Why do you suppose that Madame Tournachon would choose to appear tonight in this cafe, Beraud?

The mouchard shrugged. She is a familiar of le milieu, monsieur. She goes to Madelon's, also to Batiffol's, but it is here, in l'Univers, that she most nearly finds companionship.

And why is that, do you think?

Because she was Gautier's mistress, of course. He was a kind of prince here, monsieur, it must be understood. Her relationship with Gautier has necessarily limited her contacts with ordinary society. He taught her French, or such French as she has.

What sort of woman, exactly, do you take her to be?

Beraud smirked. She is perhaps attractive, but cold. Unsympathetic. In the manner of Englishwomen, you understand.

When she arrives, Beraud—if she arrives, I should say—you are to take your leave immediately.

Beraud raised his eyebrows. On the contrary, monsieur—

You are to go, Beraud. Take your leave. A measured pause. Vanish.

The sharply padded shoulders of Beraud's brown suit rose at the word.

You will instruct the cab to wait, and the stenographer as well. The stenographer, Beraud—his English is adequate? My friend—my very good friend. Monsieur Arslau—has assured me that this is the case 

Entirely adequate, yes! And monsieur—getting up so quickly that he nearly overturned his bentwood chair—it is she 

The woman now entering l'Univers might easily have been mistaken for a modish Parisienne of more than common means. Slender and blond, she wore a somber merino crinoline with matching cloak and bonnet, narrowly trimmed in mink.

As Beraud continued his hasty retreat into the depths of the cafe, Oliphant rose. Her eyes, very alert, very blue, met his. He approached her, hat in hand, and bowed. Forgive me, he said in English. We have not been introduced, but I must speak with you regarding a matter of great urgency.

Recognition dawned in the wide blue eyes, and fear.

Sir, you mistake me for another.

You are Sybil Gerard.

Her lower-lip was trembling now, and Oliphant experienced an abrupt, powerful, and entirely unexpected sympathy. I am Laurence Oliphant, Miss Gerard. You are presently in terrible danger. I wish to help you.

That is not my name, sir. Pray let me pass. My friends are waiting.

I know that Egremont betrayed you. I understand the nature of his betrayal.

She started at the name, Oliphant in terror of her swooning on the spot, but then she gave a little shudder and seemed to study him quietly for a moment. I saw you in Grand's, that night, she said. You were in the smoker with Houston and Mick. You had a gammy arm, up in a sling.

Please, he said, join me.

Seated opposite her at his table, Oliphant listened as she ordered absinthe de vidangeur in quite passable French.

Do you know Lamartine, the singer? she asked.

I'm sorry, no.

He invented it, 'scavenger's absinthe.' I can't drink it otherwise.

The waiter arrived with the drink, a mixture of absinthe and red wine.

Theo taught me to order it, she said, before he went away. She drank, the wine red against her painted lips. I know you've come to take me back. Don't gull me otherwise. I know a copper when I meet one.

I have no desire to see you return to England, Miss Gerard—

Tournachon. I'm Sybil Tournachon. French by marriage.

Your husband is here in Paris?

No, she said, lifting an oval locket of cut-steel on its black ribbon. She snapped it open, displaying a daguerreotyped miniature of a handsome young man. Aristide. He fell at Philadelphia, in the great inferno. He volunteered, to fight on the Union side. He was real, you know; I mean, he actually existed, and wasn't just one of them the clackers make up  She gazed at the little image with a look of mingled longing and sadness, though Oliphant understood that she had never in her life set eyes upon Aristide Tournachon.

It was a marriage of convenience, I take it.

Yes. And you've come to take me back.

Not at all, Miss Tournachon.

I don't believe you.

You must. A great deal depends upon it, not least your own safety. Since you departed London, Charles Egremont has become a very powerful, a very dangerous man. As dangerous to the well-being of Great Britain as he is no doubt dangerous to you.

Charles? Dangerous? She seemed suddenly on the verge of laughter. You're gulling me.

I need your help. Desperately. As desperately as you need mine.

Do I, then?

Egremont has powerful resources at his command, branches of Government easily capable of reaching you here.

You mean the Specials, and that lot?

More to the point, I must inform you that your activities are even now monitored by at least one secret agency of Imperial France 

Because Theophile chose to help me?

Indeed, that seems to be the case 

She drank off the last of the vile-looking concoction in her glass. Dear Theophile. What a lovely, silly sort of cove he was. Always in his scarlet waistcoat, and madly clever at clacking. I gave him Mick's set of fancy cards, and he was terribly kind to me then. Spun me up a marriage-license and a French citizen-number rat-tat-tat. Then, one afternoon, I was to meet him here

Yes?

He never came. She lowered her eyes. He used to boast of having a 'gambling modus.' They all do, but he talked as if he meant it. Someone might have believed him. It was foolish of him 

Did he ever speak with you about his interest in the Engine known as the Great Napoleon?

Their monster, you mean? Your Paris clacker speaks of little else, sir! They're mad for the thing!

The French authorities believe that Theophile Gautier damaged the Great Napoleon with Radley's cards.

Is he dead, then, Theo?

Oliphant hesitated. Alas, I believe so, yes.

That's so vicious bloody cruel, she said, to spirit a man away like a rabbit in a conjuring trick, and leave his loved-ones ever to wonder, and worry, and never rest! It's vile.

Oliphant found that he could not meet her eyes.

There's a deal of that about in this Paris, there is, she said. The things I've heard their clackers jest about And London, they say, is no better, really, to them as know. Do you know they say the Rads murdered Wellington? They say the sappers, the sand-hogs, hand-in-glove with the Rads, cut a tunnel beneath that restaurant, and the master sapper himself tamped the powder and set the fuses Then the Rads lay the blame on men like

Your father. Yes. I know.

And knowing that, you'd ask me to trust you? There was defiance in her eyes, and perhaps a pride long-buried.

Knowing that Charles Egremont betrayed your father, Walter Gerard, unto his destruction; that he betrayed you as well, bringing about your ruin in the eyes of society; yes, I must ask that you trust me. In exchange, I offer you the complete, utter, and virtually instantaneous negation of your betrayer's political career.

She lowered her eyes again, and seemed to consider. Could you do that, really? she asked.

Your testament alone will serve. I shall be merely the instrument of its delivery.

No, she said at last, if I were to denounce him publicly, then I would expose myself as well. Charles isn't the only one I need to fear, as you yourself have said. Remember, I was there that night, in Grand's; I know how long an arm revenge can have.

I've not suggested denouncing him publicly. Blackmail will suffice.

Now her eyes were far away, as if she walked the distant pavements of memory. They were so close, Charles and my father, or so it seemed Perhaps if things had taken a different turn

Egremont lives daily with that betrayal. It is the crucial grain of constant irritation around which his depraved politics have been allowed to form. Your telegram galvanized his guilt—his terror of those early Luddite sympathies being revealed. Now he would tame the beast, make political terror his constant ally. But you and I stand in his way.

The blue eyes were strangely calm. I find I wish to believe you, Mr. Oliphant.

I will keep you safe, Oliphant said, quite startled by his own intensity. So long as you choose to remain in France, you shall do so under the protection of powerful friends, colleagues of mine, agents of the Imperial court. A cab awaits us, and a stenographer, to take down the details of your testimony.

With a tortured, flatulent wheeze of compressed air, a small panmelodium was activated at the rear of the cafe. Oliphant, turning, caught the eye of the mouchard Beraud, who was smoking a Dutch clay pipe amid a cluster of chattering kinotropistes.

Madame Tournachon, Oliphant said, rising, may I offer you my arm?

It's healed, has it? She rose in a rustle of crinoline.

Entirely, Oliphant said, remembering the lightning-stroke of the samurai's sword, in Edo, amid the shadows. He had been attempting to hold the fellow off with a riding-crop.

As the Engine-driven music of the grand panmelodium brought the grisettes from their chairs, she took his arm.

A girl burst in, then, from the street, her naked breasts daubed with green. About her waist were strung angular constructs of copper-foil, like the leaves of a date-palm approximated by a kinotrope. She was followed by two boys in a similar lack of attire, and Oliphant felt utterly lost.

Come then, Sybil said, don't you know they're art students, and been to a bal? It's Montmartre, you know, and the art students, they've such a mad and lovely time.


Oliphant had entertained the gallant notion of personally delivering to Charles Egremont a transcript of Sybil Gerard's testimony. But upon his return to England, those symptoms of advanced syphilis which Dr. McNeile had incorrectly diagnosed as railway-spine temporarily overcame him. Disguised as a commercial traveler from M. Arslau's native Alsace, Oliphant went to ground in Brighton's hydropathic spa, to take the waters and dispatch a number of telegrams.


Mr. Mori Arinori arrives in Belgravia at a quarter past four, driving a new-model Zephyr gurney leased from a commercial garage in Camden Town, just as Charles Egremont is departing for Parliament and a most important speech.

Egremont's body-guard, on assignment from the Central Statistics Bureau's Department of Criminal Anthropometry, a machine-carbine slung beneath his coat, watches as Mori descends from the Zephyr, a diminutive figure in evening-clothes.

Mori marches straight across the new-fallen snow, his boots leaving perfect prints upon the black macadam.

For you, sir, Mori says and bows, handing Egremont the stout manila envelope. Very good day to you, sir. Donning round goggles with an elasticated band, Mori returns to his Zephyr.

What an extraordinary little personage, Egremont says, looking down at the envelope. One hasn't seen a Chinaman, got up like that


Recede.

Reiterate.

Rise above these black patterns of wheel-tracks,

These snow-swept streets,

Into the great map of London,

forgetting



MODUS

The Images Tabled



The Language of Signs

The circular arrangement of the axes of the Difference Engine 'round large central wheels led to the most extended prospects. The whole of arithmetic now appeared within the grasp of mechanism. A vague glimpse even of an Analytical Engine opened out, and I pursued with enthusiasm the shadowy vision.

The drawings and the experiments were of the most costly kind. Draftsmen of the highest order were engaged, to economize the labor of my own head; whilst skilled workmen executed the experimental machinery.

In order to carry out my pursuits successfully, I had purchased a house with about a quarter of an acre of ground, in a very quiet locality in London. My coach-house was converted into a forge and foundry, whilst my stables were transformed into a workshop. I built other extensive workshops myself, and had a fire-proof building for my drawings and draftsmen.

The complicated relations amongst the various parts of the machinery would have baffled the most tenacious memory. I overcame that difficulty by improving and extending a language of signs, the Mechanical Notation, which in 1826 I had explained in a paper printed in the Philosophic Transactions of the Royal Society. By such means I succeeded in mastering a train of investigation so vast in extent that no length of years could otherwise have enabled me to control it. By the aid of the language of signs, the Engine became a reality.

–LORD CHARLES BABBAGE, Passages in the Life of a Philosopher, 1864.



Letters from Our Readers

[From The Mechanics Magazine, 1830.]


To judge by readers' letters we receive, certain among our public would doubt that political matters come within the province of this journal. But the interests of science and manufacturing are inextricably mixed with a nation's political philosophy. How then can we be silent?

We look with delight for a grand new age for Science, as well as to every other PRODUCTIVE interest of this country, from the election to Parliament of a man of Mr. Babbage's eminence in the scientific world, his tried independence of spirit, his very searching and business-like habits.

Therefore we say forthrightly to every elector of Finsbury who is a reader of this journal—go and vote for Mr. Babbage. If you are an inventor, whom the ubiquitous and oppressive TAX ON PATENTS shuts out from the field of fair competition, and desire to see that TAX replaced by a wise and deliberate system of PUBLIC SUBSIDIES—go and vote for Mr. Babbage. If you are a manufacturer, harassed and obstructed in your operations by the fiscal stupidities of the present Government—if you would see British industry become as free as the air you breathe—go and vote for Mr. Babbage. If you are a mechanic, and depend for your daily bread on a constant and steady demand for the products of your skill, and are aware of the influence of free trade on your fortunes—go and vote for Mr. Babbage. If you are a devotee of Science and Progress—principle and practice united as bone and sinew—then meet us today on Islington Green, and VOTE FOR MR. BABBAGE!



In the Time of Troubles

The results of the general election of 1830 made public feeling obvious. Byron and his Radicals had captured the tone of the day, and the Whig Party were an utter shambles. Lord Wellington's Tones, however, resenting the threat to aristocratic privilege posed by Radical proposals of merit-lordship, took a hard line. The Commons procrastinated on the Radical Reform Bill, and on 8 October the Lords threw it out. The King refused to create new Radical peers who might force the Bill through; on the contrary, the Fitzelarences were ennobled instead, leading Byron to comment bitterly How much better it is to be a Royal bastard than a philosopher in England at present. But a mighty change is at hand.

Popular pressure mounted swiftly. In Birmingham, Liverpool, and Manchester, the working-class, inspired by Babbage's ideals of union ownership and mutual co-operatives, took to the streets in massive torchlight parades. The Industrial Radical Party, disdaining violence, called for moral suasion and a peaceful mass-campaign for redress of legitimate grievances. But the Government remained stubborn, and events took an ugly turn. In a rising crescendo of random outrage, violent rural Swing bands and proletarian Luddites attacked aristocratic homes and capitalist factories alike. Mobs in London shattered the windows in the house of the Duke of Wellington and other Tory peers, and, cobblestones in hand, lay sullenly in wait for the passing carriages of the elite. The Anglican bishops, who had voted against Reform in the Lords, were burned in effigy. Ultra-radical conspirators, fired to frenzy by the furious polemics of the atheist R B. Shelley, attacked and looted Establishment churches.

On 12 December Lord Byron introduced a new Reform Bill, more radical yet, proposing outright disfranchisement of the hereditary British aristocracy, including himself. This was more than the lories could bear, and Wellington involved himself in covert planning for a military coup.

The crisis had polarized the nation. At this juncture, the middle-classes, terrified of the prospect of anarchy, made their own move and came down on the side of the Radicals. A tax-strike was declared, to force Wellington from office; there was a deliberate run on the banks, in which merchants demanded and hoarded gold specie, bringing the national economy to a grinding halt.

In Bristol, after three days of major riots, Wellington ordered the Army to put down Jacobinism by any means necessary. In the resulting massacre three hundred people, including three prominent Radical M.P.'s, lost their lives. When the news of the massacre reached him, a furious Byron, now calling himself Citizen Byron, and appearing without coat or necktie at a London rally, called for a general strike. This rally was also attacked by Tory cavalry, with bloody results, but Byron eluded capture. Two days later the nation was under martial-law.

In future, the Duke of Wellington would turn his considerable military genius against his own countrymen. The first uprisings against the Tory Regime—as it must now be called—were swiftly and efficiently put down, while garrison troops ruled all major cities. The Army remained loyal to the victor of Waterloo, and the aristocracy, to their discredit, also threw in their lot with the Duke.

But the Radical Party elite had escaped apprehension, abetted by a well-organized covert network of Party faithful. By the spring of '31, any hope of a swift military solution was over. Mass hangings and deportations were answered by sullen resistance and vicious guerrilla reprisals. The Regime had destroyed any vestige of popular support, and England was in the throes of class-war.

–The Time of Troubles A Popular History, 1912, BY W. E. PRATCHETT, Ph.D., F.R.S.



Somber Melodies of the Automatic Organs

[This private letter of July 1855 conveys Benjamin Disraeli's eye-witness impressions of the funeral of Lord Byron. The text derives from a tape-spool emitted by a Colt & Maxwell Typing Engine. The addressee is unknown.]


Lady Annabella Byron entered on the arm of her daughter, looking very frail. She seemed a little dazed. Both mother and daughter were very worn and white, at the end of their forces. Then a funeral march was played—very fine—the panmelodium sounding splendid amid the somber melodies of the automatic organs.

Then the processions arrived. The Speaker first, proceeded by heralds with white staves but in mourning-dress. The Speaker was quite splendid. He walked slowly and firmly, very impassive and dignified; an almost Egyptianate face. The mace was carried before him, and he wore a gold-laced gown, very fine. Then the Ministers; Colonial Secretary, very dapper indeed. Viceroy of India looks quite recovered from his malaria. Chairman of the Commission on Free Trade looked the wickedest of the human race, as if writhing under a load of disreputable guilt.

Then the House of Lords. The Lord Chancellor absolutely grotesque, and made more so by the tremendous figure of the Sergeant-at-Arms with a silver chain and large, white silk bows on his shoulders for mourning. Lord Babbage, pale and upright, most dignified. Young Lord Huxley, lean, light on his feet, very splendid. Lord Scowcroft, the shiftiest person I ever saw, in threadbare clothes like a sexton.

The coffin came solemnly along, the bearers holding feebly onto it. The Prince Consort Albert foremost among them, with the oddest gnawing look—duty, dignity, and fear. He was kept waiting, I hear, just in the doorway, and muttered in German about the Stink.

When the coffin entered, the widowed Iron Lady looked a thousand years old.



The Widowed Iron Lady

So now the world falls into the hands of the little men, the hypocrites and clerks.

Look at them. They have not the mettle for the great work. They will botch it.

Oh, even now I could set it all to rights, if only the fools would listen to sense, but I could never speak as you did, and they do not listen to women. You were their Great Orator, a puffed and painted mountebank, without one real idea in your head—no gift for logic, nothing but your posturing wickedness, and yet they listened to you; oh, how they did listen. You wrote your silly books of verse, you praised Satan and Cain and adultery, and every kind of wicked foolishness, and the fools could not get enough of it. They knocked down the bookshop doors. And women threw themselves at your feet, armies of them. I never did. But then, you married me.

I was innocent then. From the days of our courtship, some moral instinct in me revolted at your sly teasing, your hateful double-entendres and insinuations, but I did see qualities of promise in you, and ignored my doubts. How swiftly you revived them, as my husband.

You cruelly used my innocence; you made me a party to sodomy before I even knew the nature of that sin; before I learned the hidden words for the unspeakable. Pederastia, manustupration, fellatio—you were so steeped in unnatural vice that you could spare not even the marriage-bed. You polluted me, even as you had polluted your own hare-brained fool of a sister.

If society had learned the tenth of what I knew, you would have been driven from England like a leper. Back to Greece, back to Turkey and your catamites.

How easily, then, might I have ruined you, and very nearly did, to spite you, for it vexed me sorely that you did not know, or care to know, the depth of my conviction. I sought refuge in my mathematics, then, and kept to silence, wishing still to be a good wife in the eyes of society, for I had uses to which to put you, and great work to do, and no means with which to do it, save through my husband. For I had glimpsed the true path toward the greatest good for the greatest number, a good so great it made a trifle of my own humble wishes.

Charles taught it me. Decent, brilliant, unworldly Charles, your opposite in every way; so full of great plans, and the pure light of mathematical science, but so utterly impolitic, so entirely unable to suffer fools gladly. He had the gifts of a Newton, but he could not persuade.

I brought you together. At first you hated him, and mocked him behind his back, and me as well, for showing you a truth beyond your comprehension. I persisted; begged you to think of honor, of service, of your own glory, of the future of the child in my womb, Ada, that strange child. (Poor Ada, she does not look well, she has too much of you in her.)

But you cursed me for a cold-hearted shrew and retired in a drunken temper. For the sake of that greater good, I painted a smile on my face and descended open-eyed into the very Pit. How it pained me, that vile greasy probing and animal nastiness; but I let you do as you liked, and forgave you for it, and petted and kissed you for it, as if I liked it. And you wept like a child, and were grateful, and talked of love undying and united souls, until you tired of that sort of talk. And then, to hurt me, you told me dreadful, shocking things, to disgust me and frighten me away, but I would no longer allow you to frighten me; I was steeled to anything, that night. So I forgave you, forgave and forgave, until at last you could find no further confession even in the foulest dregs of your soul, and at last you had no pretense left, nothing left to say.

I imagine that after that night you became frightened of me, perhaps, a little frightened, and that did you a great deal of good, I think. It never hurt me so again, after that night. I taught myself to play all your pretty little games, and to win them. That was the price I paid, to put your beast in harness.

If there is a Judge of Men in another world, though I no longer believe that, no, not in my heart, and yet at times, evil times, times like these—I fancy I sense a never-closing, all-embracing Eye, and feel the awful pressure of its dreadful comprehension. And if there be a Judge, milord husband, then do not think to gull him. No, do not boast of your magnificent sins and demand damnation—for how little you knew, over the years. You, the greatest Minister of the greatest Empire in history—you flinched, you were feeble, you dodged every consequence—

Are these tears?

We should not have killed so many

We, I say, but it was I, I who sacrificed my virtue, my faith, my salvation, all burnt to black ashes on the altar of your ambition. For all your bold trumpery talk of Corsairs and Bonaparte, you had no iron in you; you wept even at the thought of hanging miserable Luddites, and could not bear to chain away vicious mad Shelley, until I forced your hand. And when reports came from our bureaux, hinting, requesting, then demanding the right to eliminate the enemies of England, it was I who read them, I who covertly weighed lives in the balance, and I who signed your name, while you ate and drank and joked with those men you called your friends.

And now these fools who bury you will brush me aside as if I were nothing, had accomplished nothing, simply because you are gone. You, their sounding-brass, their idol of paint and dyed hair. The truth, the dreadful slime-entangled roots of history, vanish now without trace. The truth is buried with your gilt sarcophagus.

I must stop thinking in this manner. I am weeping. They think me old and foolish. Was not every civil evil we committed repaid, repaid ten-fold for the public good?

Oh Judge, hear me. Oh Eye, search the depths of my soul. If I am guilty, then you must forgive me. I took no pleasure in what I had to do. I swear unto you I took no pleasure in it.



The Master Emeritus Recalls Wellington

The reddish glow of enfeebled gas-light. The rhythmic, echoing clank and screech of the Brunel Tunneling Torpedo. Thirty-six cork-screw teeth of best Birmingham steel gnaw with relentless vigor into a reeking seam of ancient London clay.

Master Sapper Joseph Pearson, at his ease at the mid-day meal, feeds himself a congealed wedge of gravy-thick meat-pie from a hinged tin box. Aye, I met the great Mallory, he says, voice echoing from arching whale-ribs of riveted cast-iron. We warn't exactly introduced, like, but he was Leviathan Mallory, right-enough, for I seen his phiz in the penny-papers. He stood as close to me as I am to you now, lad. 'Lord Jefferies?' the Leviathan says to me, all surprised and angry, 'I know Jefferies! The fookin' bastard should be censured for fraud!' 

Master Pearson grins in triumph, red light glinting from a gold earring, a gold tooth. And damme if that savant Jefferies didn't catch every kind of hell, once the Stink had passed. Leviathan Mallory took a proper hand in that chastisement, sure enough. He's one of Nature's noblemen. Leviathan Mallory is.

I seen that brontosaur, says 'Prentice David Waller, nodding, eyes bright. That's a fine thing!

I myself was workin' the shaft in '54, when they dug up them elephant teeth. Master Pearson, rubber-booted feet dangling from the second-story platform of the excavation-shaft, shifts on his damp-proofed mat of coir and burlap, and yanks a split of champagne from a pocket of his excavation-gear. French fizz, Davey-lad. Your first time down; ye got to have a taste of this.

That ain't proper, is it, sir? 'Gainst the book.

Pearson wrenches the cork loose, no pop, no gush of foam. He winks. Hell, lad, it's your first time down; won't never be another first time. Pearson tosses sugary dregs of strong tea from his tin cup, fills it to the brim with champagne.

It's gone flat, 'Prentice Waller mourns.

Pearson laughs, rubbing a burst vein in his fleshy nose. It's the pressure, lad. Wait till ye get topside. It goes off right inside yer. You'll fart like an ox.

'Prentice Waller sips, with some caution. An iron bell rings, above them. Chamber coming down, Pearson says, hastily corking the bottle. He stuffs it back into a pocket, gulps the rest of the cup, wipes his mouth.

A bullet-shaped cage descends, passing with cloacal slowness through a membrane of heavy waxed leather. There are hisses, creaks, as the cage touches bottom.

Two men emerge. The Chief Foreman wears a helmet, digging-gear, and leather apron. With him, carrying a brass dark-lantern, is a tall, white-haired man in a black tailcoat and black satin cravat, a kerchief of black silk crepe about his polished top-hat. In the red light of the tunnel, a pigeon's-egg diamond, or perhaps a ruby, glints at the old man's throat. Like the Chief Foreman, his trousered legs are swathed in knee-high boots of india-rubber.

The Grand Master Miner Emeritus, Pearson gasps in a single breath, and scrambles at once to his feet. Waller leaps up as well.

The two of them stand at attention as the Grand Master strolls beneath them, up the tunnel toward the Torpedo's massive digging-face. He does not glance up, takes no notice of them, but speaks with cool authority to the Foreman. He examines bolts, seams, and grouting with the stabbing beam of his bull's-eye lantern. The lantern has no handle, for the Grand Master carries the hot brass caught in a sleek iron hook which protrudes from an empty sleeve.

But that's a queer way to dress, ain't it? whispers young Waller.

He's still in mourning, Pearson whispers.

Ah, says the 'prentice. He watches the Grand Master walk on a bit. Still?

He knew Lord Byron dead-familiar like, the Grand Master did. Knew Lord Babbage too! In the Time o' Troubles—when they was running from Wellington's Tory police! They warn't no Lordships then—not proper Rad Lords, anyway, just rebels and agitators, like, with a price on their heads. The Grand Master hid 'em out down a digging once—a reg'lar Party headquarters, it was. The Rad Lords never forgot the great favors he done for 'em. That's why we're the greatest of Radical unions.

Ah.

That's a great man, Davey! Master of iron, a great master of blasting-powder They don't make 'em like him, today.

So—he must be nigh eighty now, eh?

Still hale and hearty.

Could we get down, sir, d'ye think—could I see him up close, like? Maybe shake his famous hook!

All right, lad—but on your dignity now. No bad words.

They climb down to the bare planks at the base of the tunnel.

As they follow the Grand Master, the gnawing rumble of the Torpedo changes abruptly. The Torpedo's crew leaps up, for such a change means trouble—quicksand, a vein of water, or worse. Pearson and his 'prentice break into a shuffling run toward the digging-face.

Shavings of soft black filth begin to pour from the sharp iron spirals of the thirty-six twisting teeth, falling in greasy clods to the flat-carts of the carriage-ramp. From within the black soil of the digging-face come little muffled pops of old embedded gas-pockets, weak as Pearson's enfeebled champagne-cork. No deadly rush of water, though; no slurry of quicksand. They inch forward warily, gazing after the sharp white beam of the Grand Master's lantern.

Knobs of hardened yellow show amid greenish-black muck. Bones, is it? says a workman, wiping his nose at a smell of soured dust. Fossils, like

Bones pour forth in a broken torrent as the Torpedo's hydraulics lurch in reaction, pressing it forward into the softening mass. Human bones.

A cemetery! Pearson cries. We've hit a churchyard!

But the tunnel is too deep for that, and there are too many bones, bones tangled thick as the branches of a fallen forest, in a deep promiscuous mass, and mixed of a sudden with a thin and deadly reek, of long-buried lime and sulphur.

Plague pit! the Chief Foreman cries in terror, and the men fall back, stumbling. There is a lurch, and a hiss of steam as the Foreman shuts down the Torpedo.

The Grand Master has not moved.

He stands quietly, regarding the work of the teeth.

He puts his lamp aside, and reaches into the heap of spoil. He dabbles in it with his shining hook, and has something up by one eyehole. A skull.

Ah, then, he says, his deep voice ringing in the sudden utter silence, ye poor damn' bastard.



The Gaming Lady Is Bad Luck

The Gaming Lady is bad luck to those that know her. When a poor night at the wagering-machines has emptied her purse, her jewels are carried privately into Lombard Street, and Fortune is tempted yet again with a sum from my lady's pawnbroker! Then she sells off her wardrobe as well, to the grief of her maids; stretches her credit amongst those she deals with, pawns her honor to her intimates, in vain hope to recover her losses!

The passions suffer no less by this gaming-fever than the understanding and the imagination. What vivid, unnatural hope and fear, joy and anger, sorrow and discontent, burst out all at once upon a roll of the dice, a turn of the card, a run of the shining gurneys! Who can consider without indignation that all those womanly affections, which should have been consecrated to children and husband, are thus vilely prostituted and thrown away. I cannot but be grieved when I see the Gaming Lady fretting and bleeding inwardly from such evil and unworthy obsessions; when I behold the face of an angel agitated by the heart of a fury!

It is divinely ordered that almost everything which corrupts the soul, must also decay the body. Hollow eyes, haggard looks, and pale complexion are the natural indications of a female gamester. Her morning sleeps cannot repair her sordid midnight watchings. I have looked long and hard upon the face of the Gaming Lady. Yes, I have watched her well. I have seen her earned off half-dead from Crockford's gambling-hell, at two o'clock in the morning, looking like a specter amid a flare of wicked gas-lamps—

Pray resume your seat, sir. You are in the House of God. Is that remark to be taken as a threat, sir? How dare you. These are dark times, grave times indeed! I tell you, sir, as I tell this congregation, as I will tell all the world, that I have seen her, I have witnessed your Queen of Engines at her vile dissipations—

Help me! Stop him! Stop him! Oh dear Jesus, I am shot! I am undone! Murder! Can none of you stop him?



Gentlemen, The Choice Is Yours

[At the height of the Parliamentary crisis of 1855, Lord Brunel assembled and addressed the members of his Cabinet. His remarks were recorded by his private secretary, using the Babbage shorthand notation.]


Gentlemen, I cannot call to mind a single instance in which any individual in the Party or the Ministry has spoken, even casually, in my defense within the walls of Parliament. I have waited patiently, and I hope uncomplainingly, doing what little I could to protect and extend the wise legacy of the late Lord Byron, and to heal the reckless wounds inflicted on our Party by over-zealous juniors.

But there has been no change in the contempt in which you honorable gentlemen seem to hold me. On the contrary, the last two nights have been taken up with a debate on a vote of want-of-confidence, directed, obviously and especially, against the head of the Government. The discussion has been marked with more than usual violence against my office, and there has been no defense from any of you—the members of my own Cabinet.

How, under these circumstances, are we to successfully resolve the matter of the murder of the Reverend Alistair Roseberry? This shameful, atavistic crime, brutally perpetrated within a Christian church, has blackened the reputation of Party and Government, and cast the gravest doubts on our intentions and integrity. And how are we to root out the murderous dark-lantern societies whose power, and provocative daring, grows daily?

God knows, gentlemen, that I never sought my present office. Indeed, I would have done anything, consistent with honor, to avoid assuming it. But I must be master in this House, or else resign my office—abandoning this nation to the purported leadership of men whose intentions are increasingly stark in their clarity. Gentlemen, the choice is yours.



Death of the Marquess of Hastings

Yes, sir, two-fifteen to be quite exact, sir—and no other way to be, as we're on the Colt & Maxwell system of patent punch-clocks.


Just a sort of dripping sound, sir.


For a moment I took it to be a leakage, forgetting the night was clear. Rain, I thought, and that was all my anxiety, sir, thinking the Land Leviathan would be damaged by damp, so I flung my lantern's beam up quick, and there the poor rascal hung, and blood all down the Leviathan's neck-bones, sir, and all on the—what d'ye call 'em?—the armatures, what hold the beast upright. And his head a bloody min, sir—no longer as you'd call a head at all. Dangling there by his ankles from this manner of harness, and I saw the ropes and pulleys going straight up, taut, into the dark of the great dome, and the sight struck me so, sir, that it wasn't till I'd sounded the alarm that I saw the Leviathan's head was missing too.


Yes, sir, I do believe that to be the case—the manner in which it was done. He was lowered down from the dome and did the job up there, in the dark, and paused when he'd hear my footsteps, and then continue his work. The work of some hours, for they'd had to rig their lines and pulleys. Likely I passed beneath them several times, on my watch. And when he'd got it free, the head, sir, someone else winched it up, and took it away through that panel they'd unbolted. But something must have given, sir, or slipped, for down he came, square into the floor, best Florentine marble that is. We found where his brains had been dashed, sir, though I'd as soon forget it. And I did then recall a sound, sir, likely of him striking, but no outcry.


If I may say, sir, what strikes me as vilest, in the whole business, must be the cool way they hauled him back up, quiet as spiders, and left him slung there, like a coney in a butcher's window, and stole away across the roof-top with their booty. There's a deal of meanness in that, isn't there?


–KENNETH REYNOLDS, night watchman, the Museum of Practical Geology, in deposition before Magistrate G. H. S. Peters, Bow Street, Nov. 1855.



Believe Me Always



MY DEAR EGREMONT,

I write to you to express my profound regret that the circumstances of the moment should deprive me of the opportunity and hope of enlisting your great capacity in the further service of Party and Government.

You will well understand that my recognition of your difficult personal circumstances is absolutely separate from any want of confidence in you as a statesman; this is the last idea I should wish to convey.

How can I close without fervently expressing to you my desire that there may be reserved for you a place of permanent public distinction?


Believe me always,

Yours sincerely,

    I. K. BRUNEL

–Ministerial letter to Charles Egremont, M.P., Dec. 1855.



Memorandum to the Foreign Office

On this occasion, our distinguished guest, the ex-President of the American Union, Mr. Clement L. Vallandigham, got as drunk as a fiddle. The eminent Democrat showed that he could be as profligate as any English Lord. He fumbled Mrs. A., kissed the shrieking Miss B., pinched the plump Mrs. C. black and blue, and ran at Miss D. with flagrant intent to ravish her!

Finally, after throwing our female guests into hysterics by behaving like an elephant in must, the noble beast was captured by main force, and carried upstairs, all four feet in the air, by our household staff. Within his room, Mrs. Vallandigham was awaiting him, in shift and mobcap. There and then, to our considerable amazement, this remarkable man satiated his baffled lust on the unresisting body of his legitimate spouse, and copiously vomited during the operation. Those who have seen Mrs. Vallandigham would not think this latter incredible.

News has now reached me that the former President of Texas, Samuel Houston, has died in Veracruz, in his Mexican exile. He was, I believe, awaiting any call to arms that might have brought him back to eminence; but the French alcaldes were likely too wily for him. Houston had his faults, I know, but he was easily worth ten of Clement Vallandigham, who made a shrinking peace with the Confederacy, and has allowed the vultures of Red Manhattan Communism to gnaw the carcass of his dishonored country.

–LORD LISTON, 1870.



Before the Rads

[The following testament is a sound-recording inscribed on wax. One of the earliest such recordings, it preserves the spoken reminiscences of Thomas Towler (b. 1790), grandfather of Edward Towler, inventor of the Towler Audiograph. Despite the experimental nature of the apparatus employed, the recording is of exceptional clarity. 1875.]


I remember one winter and it was a very long cold winter, and there was dire poverty in England then, before the Rads. Me brother Albert, he used to get some bricks and cover them with bird-lime, and set 'em by the stables to catch sparrows. And he'd pluck them, clean them, him and me together, I helped him. Our Albert would make a fire and get the oven hot and we used to cook those little sparrows in Mother's roasting-tin, with a big lump of dripping in it. And me mother'd make a big jug of tea for us and we'd have what we'd call a tea-party, eating those sparrows.

Me father he went to all the shopkeepers on Chatwin Road and got scrap-meat. Bones, you know, lamb-bones, all sorts of things, dried peas, beans, and left-over carrots and turnips and he got some oatmeal promised him and a baker gave him stale bread Me father had a big iron boiler that he used to make gruel for the horses and he cleaned it all out and they made soup in this big horse-boiler. I can remember seeing the poor people come. They came twice a week, that winter. They had to bring their own jugs. They was that hungry, before the Rads.

And Eddie, did you ever hear tell of the Irish Famine, in the forties? I thought not. But the 'later crop failed then, two, three years in a row, and it looked mighty dire for the Irish. But the Rads, they wouldn't stand for that, and declared an emergency, and mobilized the nation. Lord Byron made a fine speech, in all the papers I signed aboard one of the relief-boats, out of Bristol. All day, all night, we'd load big gantry-crates, with bills-of-lading from the London Engines; trains come day and night from all over England, with every kind of food. God Bless Lord Babbage, the poor Irish would cry to us, with tears in their eyes, Three cheers for England and the Rad Lords. They have long memories, our own loyal Irish they don't never forget a kindness.



John Keats in Half-Moon Street

I was ushered by a man-servant into Mr. Oliphant's study. Mr. Oliphant greeted me cordially, and noted that my telegram had mentioned my association with Dr. Mallory. I told Mr. Oliphant that it had been my pleasure to accompany Dr. Mallory's triumphant lecture on the Brontosaurus with a highly advanced kinotropic program. The Monthly Review of the Steam Intellect Society had run a most gratifying review of my efforts, and I offered Mr. Oliphant a copy of the magazine. He glanced within it, but it seemed that his grasp of the intricacies of clacking was amateurish at best, for his reaction was one of polite puzzlement.

I then informed him that Dr. Mallory had led me to his door. In one of our private conversations, the great savant had seen fit to tell me of Mr. Oliphant's daring proposal—to employ the Engines of the police in the scientific exploration of previously hidden patterns underlying the movements and occupations of the metropolitan population. My admiration for this bold scheme had brought me directly to Mr. Oliphant, and I stated my willingness to assist in the implementation of that vision.

He interrupted me, then, in a markedly distracted manner. We are numbered, he declared, each of us, by an all-seeing eye; our minutes, too, are numbered, and each hair upon our heads. And surely it was God's will, that the computational powers of the Engine be brought to bear upon the great commonality, upon the flows of traffic, of commerce, the tidal actions of crowds—upon the infinitely divisible texture of His work.

I waited for a conclusion to this extraordinary outburst, but Mr. Oliphant seemed quite lost in thought, of a sudden.

I then explained to him, as nearly as possible in layman's terms, how the nature of the human eye necessitates, in kinotropy, both remarkable speed and remarkable complexity. For this reason, I concluded, we kinotropists must be numbered among Britain's most adept programmers of Enginery of any sort, and virtually all advances in the compression of data have originated as kinotropic applications.

At this point, he interrupted again, asking if I had indeed said the compression of data, and was I familiar with the term algorithmic compression? I assured him that I was.

He rose, then, and going to a bureau near at hand, he brought out what I took to be a wooden box of the sort used to transport scientific instruments, though this was partially covered, it seemed, with remnants of white plaster. And would I be so kind, he requested, as to examine the cards within, copy them for safekeeping, and privately report to him upon the nature of their content?

He had no idea of their astonishing import, you see, no idea whatever.

–JOHN KEATS, quoted in an interview conducted by H. S. Lywood, for The Monthly Review of the Steam Intellect Society, May 1857.



The Grand Panmelodium Polka

		Oh! Sure the world is all run mad,
		The lean, the fat, the old, the Rad,
		All swear such pleasure they ne'er had,
		As the Grand Panmelodium Polka.

		First cock up your right leg so,
		Balance on your left great toe,
		Stamp your heels and off you go,
		The Grand Panmelodium Polka.

		Quadrilles and waltzes all give way,
		Machine-made music bears the sway.
		The chimney-sweeps on the first of May,
		In London dance the Polka.

		If a pretty girl you meet,
		With sparkling eyes and rosy cheek,
		She'll say, young man we'll have a treat,
		If you can dance the Polka.

		Professors swarm in every street,
		To hear the Panmelodium sweet,
		And every friend you chance to meet,
		Asks if you dance the Polka.

		And so the row-de-dow we dance,
		And in short skirts and brass-heels prance,
		Ladies won't you spare a glance,
		For the boys what spin the Polka.



The Tatler

We learn with mingled regret and amazement of the recent departure, aboard the Great Eastern, of the well-liked and many-talented Mr. Laurence Oliphant—author, journalist, diplomat, geographer, and friend of the Royal Family—for America, with the stated intention of residing in the so-called Susquehanna Phalanstery established by Messrs. Coleridge and Wordsworth, thereby to pursue the Utopian doctrines espoused by these worthy expatriates!

– 'ROUND TOWN, a column, September 12, 1860.



A London Playbill, 1866

THE GARRICK THEATRE, Whitechapel, Newly Rebuilt and Refurbished, Under the Management of J. J. TOBIAS, Esq., presents The First Nights of a New Kinotropic Drama Monday, Nov. 13 and During the Week

The performance will commence with (FIRST TIME!) an entirely new national, local, characteristic, metropolitan, melodramatic, kinotropic drama of the day, in five acts, correctly exhibiting modern life and manners in innumerable novel and interesting phases, called the


CROSSROADS OF LIFE!!

or THE CLACKERS OF LONDON


The Groundwork of the drama founded on the celebrated play, Les Fils de Vaucanson, now attracting the attention of all France, and applied to the circumstances and realities of the present moment.


With kinotropic scenery by MR. JJ TOBIAS and Assistants

The New Flash Medley Orchestra, led by MR. MONTGOMERY

The Action of the Piece arranged by MR. CJ SMITH

The Dresses by MRS. HAMPTON and MISS BAILEY

The Whole Produced Under the Direction of MR. JJ TOBIAS


Dramatis Personae


Mark Riddley, alias Fox Skinner, (a swell cove, and King of the London Clackers) MR. H.L. MARSTON.

Mr. Dorrington (a wealthy Liverpool Merchant, on a visit to London) MR. J. ROMER.

Frank Danvers (a British Naval Officer, just arrived from the Indies) MR. WM. BIRD.

Robert Danvers (his younger brother, a ruined roue, pigeoned by the clackers) MR. L. MELVIN.

Mr. Hawksworth Shabner (Principal Proprietor of a West-End Clacking-Hall, Bill-Discounter, and Anythingarian where there is Anything to be Got) MR. P. WILLIAMS.

Bob Yorkner (a Duffer, tired of the Lay) MR. W. JONES.

Ned Brindle (the Magsman, a half-and-half cove) MR C. AUBREY.

Tom Fogg, alias Old Deady, alias The Animal, (a laudanum fiend suffering under delirium-tremens) MR. A. CORENO.

Joe Onion, alias The Crocodile, (a bully-rock, and creature of Shabner's) MR. G. VELASCO.

Dickey Smith (the Wakeful Bird, a young Engine-clerk in no ways particklar, pecking out a living as best he can) MR. G. MASKELL.

Ikey Bates (Landlord of Rat's Castle, proprietor of two-penny dabs and a scandalous bagatelle board, having cut the bumblepuppy as too low!) MR. GOTOBED.

Waiter at the Cat-and-Bagpipes Tavern MR. SMITHSON.

The Bow Street Special Inspector MR. FRANKS.

Louisa Truehait (the Victim of an ill-requited attachment) MISS CAROLINE BARNETT.

Charlotte Willers (a young lady with her cat from the country) MISS MARTHA WELLS


DRESS CIRCLE, 3S. BOXES, 2S. PIT, 5D. GALLERY, 2D.

BOX OFFICE OPEN DAILY FROM TEN O'CLOCK UNTIL FIVE.



A Poem of Farewell

[Mori Yujo, a samurai and classical scholar of Satsuma Province, wrote the following ceremonial poem upon his son's departure for England, in 1854. it is translated from Sinicized Japanese.]


		My child rides the unfathomable deep,
		In pursuit of noble ambition;
		Far must he sail—ten thousand leagues—
		Outpacing the breezes of spring.
		Some say that East and West
		Have naught in common;
		But I say the same heaven
		Overarches both.
		His own life he risks, on command of his han.
		Braving great danger to learn from far places;
		For family's sake, he spares no effort,
		Seeking for wisdom in face of great hardship.
		He travels far beyond
		The fabled rivers of China;
		His scholarly labors shall someday
		Bear fruit in splendid achievement.



A Letter Home

As always, I searched that day for land, in all four directions, but could still find none. How melancholy it was! Then by chance, with the Captain's permission, I climbed up one of the masts. From the great height, with sails and smokestack far below me, I was amazed to make out the coast of Europe—a mere hair's-breadth of green, above the watery horizon. I shouted down to Matsumura Come up! Come up! And up he came, very swiftly and bravely.

Together atop the mast, we gazed upon Europe. Look! I told him. Here is our first proof that the world is really round! While we were standing down there on deck we could not see a thing; but up here, land is distinctly visible. This is proof that the surface of the sea is curved! And if the sea is curved, why, then, so is the whole earth!

Matsumura exclaimed, It's fantastic—it's just the way you say! The Earth indeed is round! Our first real proof!

–MORI ARINORI, 1854.



Modus

It seemed that Her Ladyship had been ill-served by the Paris publicists, for the lecture-hall, modest as it was, was less than half-filled.

Dark folding-seats, in neat columnar rows, were precisely dotted by the shiny pates of balding mathematicians. Here and there among the savants sat shifty-eyed French clackers in middle-age, the summer linen of their too-elegant finery looking rather past the mode. The last three rows were filled by a Parisian women's club, fanning themselves in the summer heat and chattering quite audibly, for they had long since lost the thread of Her Ladyship's discourse.

Lady Ada Byron turned a page, touched a gloved finger to her bifocal pince-nez. For some minutes, a large green bottle-fly had been circling her podium. Now it broke the intricacy of its looping flight to alight on the bulging archipelago of Her Ladyship's padded, lace-trimmed shoulder. Lady Ada took no apparent notice of the attentions of this energetic vermin, but continued on gamely, in her accented French.

The Mother said

Our lives would be greatly clarified if human discourse could be interpreted as the exfoliation of a deeper formal system. One would no longer need ponder the grave ambiguities of human speech, but could judge the validity of any sentence by reference to a fixed and finitely describable set of rules and axioms. It was the dream of Leibniz to find such a system, the Characteristica Universalis

And yet the execution of the so-called Modus Program demonstrated that any formal system must be both incomplete and unable to establish its own consistency. There is no finite mathematical way to express the property of 'truth.' The transfinite nature of the Byron Conjectures were the ruination of the Grand Napoleon; the Modus Program initiated a series of nested loops, which, though difficult to establish, were yet more difficult to extinguish. The program ran, yet rendered its Engine useless! It was indeed a painful lesson in the halting abilities of even our finest ordinateurs.

Yet I do believe, and must assert most strongly, that the Modus technique of self-referentiality will someday form the bedrock of a genuinely transcendent meta-system of calculatory mathematics. The Modus has proven my Conjectures, but their practical exfoliation awaits an Engine of vast capacity, one capable of iterations of untold sophistication and complexity.

Is it not strange that we mere mortals can talk about a concept—truth—that is infinitely complicated? And yet—is not a closed system the essence of the mechanical, the unthinking? And is not an open system the very definition of the organic, of life and thought?

If we envision the entire System of Mathematics as a great Engine for proving theorems, then we must say, through the agency of the Modus, that such an Engine lives, and could indeed prove its own life, should it develop the capacity to look upon itself. The Lens for such a self-examination is of a nature not yet known to us; yet we know that it exists, for we ourselves possess it.

As thinking beings, we may envision the universe, though we have no finite way to sum it up. The term, 'universe,' is not in fact a rational concept, though it is something of such utter immediacy that no thinking creature can escape a pressing knowledge of it, and indeed, an urge to know its workings, and the nature of one's own origin within it.

In his final years, the great Lord Babbage, impatient of the limits of steam-power, sought to harness the lightning in the cause of calculation. His elaborate system of 'resistors' and 'capacitors,' while demonstrative of the most brilliant genius, remains fragmentary, and is yet to be constructed. Indeed, it is often mocked by the undiscerning as an old man's hobby-horse. But history shall prove its judge, and then, I profoundly hope, my own Conjectures will transcend the limits of abstract concept and enter the living world.

Applause was thin and scattered. Ebenezer Fraser, watching from the shelter of the wings, in the shadow of ropes and sandbags, felt his heart sink. But at least it was over. She was leaving the podium to join him.

Fraser opened the nickeled catches of Her Ladyship's traveling-bag. Lady Ada dropped her manuscript within it, followed it with her kid gloves and her tiny ribboned hat.

I think they understood me! she said brightly. It sounds quite elegant in French, Mr. Fraser, does it not? A very rational language, French.

What next, milady? The hotel?

My dressing-room, she said. This heat is rather fatiguing Will you hail the gurney for me? I'll join you presently.

Certainly, milady. Fraser, the bag in one hand, his sword-cane in another, led Lady Ada to the cramped little dressing-room, opened the door, bowed her within, set her bag at her neatly slippered feet, and closed the door firmly. Within the room, he knew. Her Ladyship would seek the consolation of the silvered brandy-flask she had hidden in the left-hand lower drawer of her dressing-table—wrapped, with pathetic duplicity, in a shroud of tissue-paper.

Fraser had taken the liberty of providing seltzer-water in a bucket of ice. He hoped she would water the liquor a bit.

He left the lecture-hall by a rear door, then circled the building warily, from old habit. His bad eye ached below the patch, and he made some use of the stag-handled sword-cane. As he had fully expected, he saw nothing resembling trouble.

There was also no sign of the chauffeur for Her Ladyship's hired gurney. Doubtless the frog rascal was nursing a bottle somewhere, or chatting-up a soubrette. Or he might, perhaps, have mistaken his instructions, for Fraser's French was none of the best. He rubbed his good eye, examining the traffic. He would give the fellow twenty minutes, then hail a cab.

He saw Her Ladyship standing, rather uncertainly, at the lecture-hall's rear door. She had put on a day-bonnet, it seemed—and forgotten her traveling-bag, which was very like her. He hurried, limping, to her side. This way, milady—the gurney will meet us at the corner

He paused. It was not Lady Ada.

I believe you mistake me, sir, the woman said in English, and lowered her eyes, and smiled. I am not your Queen of Engines. I am merely an admirer.

I beg your pardon, madame, Fraser said.

The woman glanced down shyly at the intricate Jacquard patterning of her white-on-white skirt of fine muslin. She wore a jutting French bustle, and a stiff high-shouldered walking-jacket, trimmed with lace. Her Ladyship and I are dressed quite alike, she said, with a wry half-smile. Her Ladyship must shop at Monsieur Worth's! That's quite a tribute to my own taste, sir, n'est-ce pas?

Fraser said nothing. A light tingle of suspicion touched him. The woman—a trim little blonde, in her forties perhaps—wore the dress of respectability. Yet there were three gold-banded brilliants on her gloved fingers, and showy little stems of filigreed jade dangled at her delicate earlobes. There was a killing beauty-patch—or a black sticking-plaster—at the corner of her mouth, and her wide blue eyes, for all their look of seasoned innocence, held the gleam of the demi-mondaine—a look that somehow said, I know you, copper.

Sir, may I wait for Her Ladyship with you? I hope I will not intrude if I request her autograph.

At the corner, Fraser nodded. The gurney. He offered her his left arm, tucked the sword-cane in the pit of his right, his hand resting easy on the handle. It would not hurt to get a bit of distance down the pavement, before Lady Ada approached; he wanted to watch this woman.

They stopped at the corner, beneath an angular French gas-lamp. It's so good to hear a London voice, said the woman, coaxingly. I have lived so long in France that my English has grown quite rusty.

Not at all, Fraser said. Her voice was lovely.

I am Madame Tournachon, she said, Sybil Tournachon.

My name is Fraser. He bowed.

Sybil Tournachon fidgeted with her kid-skin gloves, as though her palms were perspiring. The day was very hot. Are you one of her paladins, Mr. Fraser?

I'm afraid I fail to take your meaning, madame, Fraser said politely. Do you live in Paris, Mrs. Tournachon?

In Cherbourg, she said, but I came all that way, by the morning express, simply to see her speak. She paused. I scarcely understood a word she said.

No harm in that, madame, Fraser said, neither do I. He had begun to like her.

The gurney arrived. The chauffeur, with a bold wink at Fraser, hopped from behind the wheel and whipped a dirty chamois from his pocket. He applied it to the tarnished trim of a scalloped fender, whistling.

Her Ladyship emerged from the lecture-hall. She had remembered her hand-bag. As she approached, Mrs. Tournachon went a bit pale with excitement, and took a lecture-program from her jacket.

She was quite harmless.

Your Ladyship, may I present Mrs. Sybil Tournachon, Fraser said.

How do you do? Lady Ada said.

Mrs. Tournachon curtsied. Will you sign my program? Please.

Lady Ada blinked. Fraser, adroitly, handed her the pen from his notebook. Of course, Lady Ada said, taking the paper. I'm sorry—what was the name?

 'To Sybil Tournachon.' Shall I spell it?

No need, said Her Ladyship, smiling. There's a famous French aeronaut named Tournachon, isn't there? Fraser offered his back to the flourish of Her Ladyship's pen. A relation of yours, perhaps?

No, Your Highness.

I beg your pardon? Lady Ada said.

They call you Queen of Engines Mrs. Tournachon, smiling triumphantly, plucked the inscribed program from Her Ladyship's unresisting fingers. The Queen of Engines! And you're just a funny little grey-haired blue-stocking! She laughed. This lecture-gull you're running, dearie—does it pay at all well? I do hope it pays!

Lady Ada regarded her with unfeigned astonishment.

Fraser's grip tightened on the cane. He stepped to the curb, swiftly opened the gurney door.

One moment! The woman tugged with sudden energy at one gloved finger, came up with a gaudy ring. Your Ladyship—please—I want you to have this!

Fraser stepped between them, lowering the cane. Leave her alone.

No, Mrs. Tournachon cried, I've heard the tales, I know she needs it She pressed against him, stretching out her arm. Your Ladyship, please take this! I shouldn't have wounded your feelings, it was low of me. Please take my gift! Please, I do admire you, I sat through that whole lecture. Please take it, I brought it just for you! She fell back then, her hand empty, and smiled. Thank you. Your Ladyship! Good luck to you. I shan't trouble you again. Au revoir! Bonne chance!

Fraser followed Her Ladyship into the gurney, shut the door, rapped the partition. The chauffeur took his post.

The gurney pulled away.

What a queer little personage, Her Ladyship said. She opened her hand. A fat little diamond gleamed in its filigreed setting. Who was she, Mr. Fraser?

I should guess an exile, ma'am, Fraser said. Very forward of her.

Was it wrong of me to take this? Her breath smelled of brandy and seltzer. Not really proper, I suppose. But she would have made a scene, otherwise. She held the gem up, in a sheet of dusty sunlight through the window. Look at the size of it! It must be very dear.

Paste, Your Ladyship.

Swift as thought. Lady Ada pinched the ring in her fingers like a bit of chalk, and ran the stone along the gurney's window. There was a thin grating shriek, almost inaudible, and a shining groove appeared across the glass.

They sat in companionable silence, then, on their way to the hotel.

Fraser watched Paris through the window and recalled his instructions. You may let the old girl drink as she likes, the Hierarch had told him, with his inimitable air of mincing irony, talk as she likes, flirt as she likes, saving open scandal, of course You may take your mission as fulfilled if you can keep our little Ada from the wagering-machines. There had been small chance of that disaster, for her purse held nothing but tickets and small-change, but the diamond had rather changed matters. He would have to keep a closer eye, now.

Their rooms in the Richelieu were quite modest, with a connecting-door he had not touched. The locks were sound enough, and he had found and plugged the inevitable spyholes. He kept the keys.

Is there anything left of the advance? Lady Ada asked.

Enough to tip the chauffeur, Fraser said.

Oh dear. That little?

Fraser nodded. The French savants had paid little enough for the pleasure of her learned company, and her debts had swiftly eaten that. The meager takings at the ticket-booth would scarcely have paid their passage from London.

Lady Ada opened the curtains, frowned at summer daylight, closed them again. Then I suppose I shall have to take on that tour in America.

Fraser sighed, inaudibly. They say that continent boasts many natural wonders, milady.

Which tour, though? Boston and New Philadelphia? Or Charleston and Richmond?

Fraser said nothing. The names of the alien cities struck him with a leaden gloom.

I shall toss a coin for it! Her Ladyship decided brightly. Have you a coin, Mr. Fraser?

No, milady, Fraser lied, searching his pockets with a muted jingle, I'm sorry.

Don't they pay you at all? Her Ladyship inquired, with a hint of temper.

I have my police pension, milady. Quite generous, promptly paid. The promptness part was true, at least.

She was concerned now, hurt. But doesn't the Society pay you a proper salary? Oh dear, and I've put you to so much trouble, Mr. Fraser! I had no idea.

They recompense me in their own way, ma'am. I am well rewarded.

He was her paladin. It was more than enough.

She stepped to her bureau, searching among papers and receipts. Her fingers touched the tortoise-shell handle of her traveling-mirror.

She turned then, and caught him with a woman's look. Under its pressure, he lifted his hand, quite without volition, and touched his bumpy cheek below the eye-patch. His white side-whiskers did not hide the scars. A shotgun had caught him there. It still ached sometimes, when it rained.

She did not see his gesture, though, or did not choose to see it. She beckoned him nearer. Mr. Fraser. My friend. Tell me something, won't you? Tell me the truth. She sighed. Am I nothing but a funny little grey-haired blue-stocking?

Madame, Fraser said gently, you are la Reine des Ordinateurs.

Am I? She lifted the mirror, gazed within it.

In the minor, a City.

It is 1991. It is London. Ten thousand towers, the cyclonic hum of a trillion twisting gears, all air gone earthquake-dark in a mist of oil, in the frictioned heat of intermeshing wheels. Black seamless pavements, uncounted tributary rivulets for the frantic travels of the punched-out lace of data, the ghosts of history loosed in this hot shining necropolis. Paper-thin faces billow like sails, twisting, yawning, tumbling through the empty streets, human faces that are borrowed masks, and lenses for a peering Eye. And when a given face has served its purpose, it crumbles, frail as ash, bursting into a dry foam of data, its constituent bits and motes. But new fabrics of conjecture are knitted in the City's shining cores, swift tireless spindles flinging off invisible loops in their millions, while in the hot unhuman dark, data melts and mingles, churned by gear-work to a skeletal bubbling pumice, dipped in a dreaming wax that forms a simulated flesh, perfect as thought—

It is not London—but mirrored plazas of sheerest crystal, the avenues atomic lightning, the sky a super-cooled gas, as the Eye chases its own gaze through the labyrinth, leaping quantum gaps that are causation, contingency, chance. Electric phantoms are flung into being, examined, dissected, infinitely iterated.

In this City's center, a thing grows, an auto-catalytic tree, in almost-life, feeding through the roots of thought on the rich decay of its own shed images, and ramifying, through myriad lightning-branches, up, up, toward the hidden light of vision,

Dying to be born.

The light is strong,

The light is clear;

The Eye at last must see itself

Myself

I see

I see,

I see
